Almost everything that sustains existence on the Internet starts out as one thing and rather quickly evolves into another, with that evolution often including a transition from having no profit-making model and only the ambition and purpose of aggregating traffic at its inception to a real business required to generate revenue and make a profit. Amazon began as an online bookseller; it’s now one of the world’s largest merchants of just about everything. In 2010, Amazon paid $545 million to buy Diapers.com, Soap.com, and Beauty-Bar.com, and that’s just one of many demonstrations of its commitment by creation and by acquisition to become the biggest seller and product distribution platform of everything. Jeff Bezos, the founder of Amazon, could be cast as a Bond villain bent on world domination. eBay began as an online swap meet but expanded into the auction business, a closeout merchandise distribution channel for brand-name retailers and manufacturers (somewhat mimicking the outlet malls that dot the physical landscape), and keeps trying to make itself about even more.

-----

##### Both of these also, as described previously, became the media for other merchants and marketers and are in the merchant services businesses.

 Facebook began as a way for friends to communicate and for people to make new friends. It was the small-town gatherings at church, hardware store, and high school game brought online. This incarnation lasted about sixty seconds. Celebrities were among the first to figure out how it could be used for commercial purposes. Comedian Dane Cook, now well known in the stand-up comedy business, built his fan base almost entirely via Facebook. Comedians are able to drive their fans to their club appearances, authors are able to drive book sales, and actors and movie studios promote films via Facebook. Today, it is very much a business marketing media and platform, with Facebook sites designed to flip traffic to websites that sell products and services. Facebook itself began aggressively offering marketing services for fees, utilizing data harvested from users, and engineering campaigns to selected users. Given that four to six months will pass between my writing this book and you having the opportunity to read it, it’s a safe wager that the range of direct advertising and marketing opportunities Facebook will be selling will have greatly expanded.

 This same movement from a gathering of friends or a gathering of people with a special interest to a fully commercialized advertising, marketing, and selling media rife with opportunities for local and global merchants exists with Twitter, YouTube, and (if not now, will in the near future) every similarly structured online activity site. Kim Kardashian’s last round of TV commercials for a hamburger chain were supported by her tweets to her Twitter list and communiqués to her Facebook fans, driving millions to watch premieres of the commercials at YouTube, and the size and activity of her social media lists influenced the company’s choosing and hiring her as their celebrity du jour and the amount they were willing to pay her. Even game-playing sites like Farmville inevitably morph into ad media. In 2010, Farmville hosted its first major marketing event for a big corporation: McDonald’s. It won’t be the last.

 In short, the term “social media” is mythical.

 Real social media is a neighborhood potluck with no commercial agenda or sponsors, bringing neighbors who may not know each other together, facilitating new friendships and creating an environment for purely social conversation. This is basically what businesses like Facebook and Twitter want to be seen as, but it’s definitely not what they are. The CEO of Tupperware Brands, Rick Goings, one of the smartest marketers and CEOs that I know, told me that they thought of it all as antisocial media, as it was actually more isolating of individuals than it was a force of legitimate socialization. Nonetheless, Tupperware does make extensive use of it—but has never dreamt of attempting to replace their real social media (home parties and, for agents, sales meetings) with it.

-----

##### Many users of social media sites prefer and participate in the mass delusion that they are engaged in social activity with friends, but the reality is these sites are businesses all about selling goods and services. You will hear from both users and “experts” in social media that there is resistance to the commercialization, that you may offend a lot of inhabitants of these online places by being too overtly commercial, that there is a noncommercial culture there to be sensitive to—and that’s all hooey.

 Here’s a simple rule that has made me millions and kept me from wasting a lot of time and energy: If I can’t sell, I don’t go.

 In this case, there’s a ton of selling going on, at an ever-increasing pace and pervasiveness. Do not let yourself be intimidated about selling. Find every way you can to use these media to sell, and resist any pressure to use them for other purposes.

 To be encouraging rather than discouraging, here’s a social media marketing success story from a very ordinary business, given to me by my friends Dean Killingbeck and Mark Ijlal, authors of the book FULL: A Complete Online & Offline Roadmap to Marketing Your Restaurant. Two partners with a mobile taco stand selling Korean BBQ tacos from a kitchen truck were struggling in the cluttered, competitive, urban market of Los Angeles. Their business breakthrough came from Twitter. One partner began broadcasting the truck’s locations, times there, and descriptions of unique food items on Twitter, in advance and in real time, hour by hour. They also encouraged their happy customers to tweet while enjoying their tacos, to spread the word. Their follower list grew exponentially, from 10 followers to 100 to 500 to 5,000. Their truck was soon mobbed at every stop, and a second truck was added. As of this writing, they have four trucks “fed” by 74,000 followers on Twitter. If you happen to own a restaurant (or similar business) and you’d like some free help from Dean and Mark on the use of Twitter, visit www.TheFullRestaurantBook.com/ActionPlan and click on the Twitter-related buttons.

 E-Mail Marketing

 E-mail marketing is extremely seductive because it has nominal or no cost. Truth is, bargains in marketing are rare and incidental. For the most part, you get what you pay for. If buying 200 radio spots at one station costs $20,000.00 and another costs $2,000.00, neither is probably a better bargain than the other; factoring quantity and quality of audiences, you’re probably paying the same amount per set of qualified ears. Same with everything else, including e-mail and the comparison of it to regular mail or telemarketing or other media. However, I don’t believe any of this should be looked at in either-or terms but rather in multimedia terms, as complementary multimedia, integrated media relationships. I would never advise a client to use only e-mail and never send “snail mail”—that is criminally stupid and an utterly false bargain, for so many firmly evidenced reasons there’s no room here to enumerate

-----

##### them. On the other hand, given the nominal cost, it’s pretty damn dumb not to integrate e-mail into follow-up or front-end marketing.

 The unrivaled leaders in both knowledge about e-mail marketing and the implementation of e-mail marketing as well as sophisticated multimedia follow-up marketing for any kind and size of business are my friends Clate Mask and Scott Martineau, founders of the e-mail marketing/marketing software system company Infusionsoft and authors of a book you must read: Conquer the Chaos. For all Infusion System users combined, they send about 500 million e-mails per calendar quarter (!!!), with a remarkable deliverability success rate of 98 percent, achieved in an environment where deliverability is a severe problem. Over 55 percent of brand-new Infusion users successfully get at least two marketing campaigns featuring e-mail implemented within their first sixty days. If you want to be able to fully capitalize on both e-mail marketing in general and superior follow-up on prospects, you should investigate all the help Infusion offers. You can get free information at www.ConquerTheChaosbook.com, and you can see Infusionsoft products, services, and training demonstrated at Infusionsoft.com. If you wind up directly communicating with the folks at Infusionsoft, identify yourself as a reader of this book and ask if you can get a complimentary copy of the recording of my No-Fail Fix-Your-Follow-Up presentation I did at seminars sponsored by Infusionsoft.

-----

#### A Few Additional Tips

##### There is e-mail marketing, and then there is e-mail marketing. The most overt is the simple, straightforward “Hey, we’ve got our best designer bags on sale this week only at up to 70% off last week’s prices. Click here or come on in …” Nothing wrong with such simple campaigns. They drive a lot of sales for a lot of businesses, large and small. The temptation to overcomplicate them should even be resisted. I overheard a conversation, one guy telling a buddy about getting an e- mail from Dunkin’ Donuts offering four one-pound bags of coffee for $19.00, less than $5.00 a pound, and that he had stopped on the way to their lunch to grab the deal before it went away. The guy’s a regular Dunkin’ customer, likes the coffee, buys it regularly, and welcomes their e-mail, so he required nothing cleverer than “Coffee On Sale” as an e- mail subject line and eagerly responded to a price-driven offer. You just don’t need to get cute or creative with this sort of thing. If you are a Glazer-Kennedy Insider’s Circle™ Gold or Diamond Member (see the back of this book), you get these exact kind of “sale of the week” opportunities by simple, straightforward e-mail—for different resources from our catalog, new resources, and occasionally other publishers’ resources—most weeks, all year long.

 More sensitive is the development of a prospect not yet a customer, through e-mail follow-up after they have visited your website or otherwise expressed interest and open-mindedness but haven’t bought anything. Here, one very effective strategy is the delivery of a home study course in short e-mail installments—one lesson every day or every other day over one, two, or several weeks. Every product or service is the basis for subject matter, so I’ve crafted these for chiropractors, dentists, hearing aid centers, financial advisors, wedding and event planners, photography studios, skin care and acne treatment product marketers, and on and on. By having the prospect enroll in a consumer education course rather than agree to getting e-mail from you, your own positioning is improved, the likelihood of the e-mails being opened and read leaps up, and the credence given the content of the e-mails improves as well.

 Last, be sensitive to age-related preferences and consumers’ expressed preferences with regard to e-mail versus snail mail. My daughter, who is in the forty-year-old neighborhood, is perfectly happy receiving e-mail birthday cards and thinks no less of them or their senders than she does of the people sending actual cards from Hallmark. My wife, however, a few handfuls of years older, is always disappointed by the e-mail greetings. If you include the sending of birthday greetings in your ongoing customer relationship nurturing, as part of your Ultimate Marketing Plan, surely you don’t want to get a disappointed

-----

##### reaction, do you? You would be better served doing nothing at all. Thus, you would age segment your customer list, and treat different segments differently. This is a simple example with far-reaching implications.

 Other Marketing Technology—Old Reliables

 Broadcast fax is an old standby taken away by law from U.S. marketers operating within the United States, with a few exceptions, such as membership associations communicating with their own members with their express and periodically renewed permission. However, in Canada, the United Kingdom, and many other countries, mass broadcast faxing even to prospects with whom you have no prior relationship is still perfectly permissible. It is a powerful B2B marketing tool. It is intrusive and hard to ignore, has immediacy and urgency, and can be graphically eye-catching and intriguing. And it’s dirt-cheap.

 Advertised “free recorded messages,” sometimes presented as “consumer information hotlines,” are appealing to many prospective customers you’ve aroused curiosity or interest in but who are fearful of calling for information and being harangued by a telesales shark, and who are much more prone to respond by phone than going to a website or who are listening to a radio commercial while driving or otherwise in a situation where responding immediately needs to be easy and nonthreatening. For many years, pre-Internet, the offer of a free recorded message as an alternative means of response and a “baby step” for the intrigued prospect played a major role in the advertising and marketing I did for clients in almost every type of business. Hundreds of thousands of small-business owners following my lead on this discovered that simply adding an option of calling and hearing a free consumer awareness message, with an intriguing title as a recorded message, significantly bumped response and return on investment from their Yellow Pages ads, print ads in other media, Valpak coupons, and direct mail. With the advent of websites, the majority of advertisers have abandoned the use of this tool—foolishly! It is never smart to be seduced by newly popular media tools to the extent that you leave others that are working for you behind. In marketing, you’re legally allowed as many “wives” as you like. Don’t jilt or abandon any. You don’t need to trade one in for the other. I remain a fan, advocate, and strategic user of free recorded messages.

 Two of my long-time clients not only made their own businesses infinitely more successful with the use of free recorded messages, but they went on to revolutionize their respective industries by teaching thousands of their peers to use them. In real estate, Craig Proctor became and for many years stayed one of the top RE/MAX agents in the entire world with the advertising of free recorded messages as fuel. In the carpet cleaning industry, Joe Polish liberated cleaning company operators from cheap-price and free-room advertising by teaching them to sell based on expertise and consumer education, with free recorded messages as the primary tool. There is no good reason not to use these

-----

##### strategies and this tool today, particularly if your target market is fifty or sixty years of age or older, or resistant to Internet use and giving contact information via websites.

 Automated lead capture by recorded message is also alive, well, and useful, cost-efficient especially if bringing in a lot of leads, and sometimes more effective than having calls taken “live” by humans. Automated answering gives you 24/7 coverage, zero human errors by operators, and a nonthreatening environment for the caller. There are many companies providing these services, but a leader in the field is Automated Marketing Solutions, which you can check out at www.automatedmarketingsolutions.com.

 Finally, with Alexander Graham Bell’s little invention, there is voice broadcast, meaning the mass, instantaneous delivery of a canned message to hundreds, thousands, or even millions of phone numbers. For a time, this was a widely, creatively, and very profitably used marketing media. A major trucking company used voice broadcast to recruit new drivers, which gave me the idea to employ it for cold prospecting for a client company in network marketing to recruit new distributors, and over 20,000 prospects were created this way every month. The president of Glazer-Kennedy Insider’s Circle™, Bill Glazer, in his first business—an extremely successful menswear store—used celebrity-impersonator-voiced broadcasts (featuring Elvis, President Bill Clinton, and many others) and seasonally timed blasts to promote sales to thousands of customers. One of his best was done himself, timed for delivery precisely at midnight on New Year’s Eve, with full-bore party noise in the background. Sadly, the Do Not Call Registry law virtually wiped out the ability to use this marvelous technology for reaching out to new prospects with whom you have no relationship, but it can still be used, carefully, with established customers from whom you have permission on file for communication by telephone. Despite this fact, its use has nearly ended as business owners have moved to e-mail. Big mistake. E-mails are easily ignored. A message in your voice mail, wedged between the message from your ne’er-do-well brother-in-law asking to borrow money and your neighbor apologizing for his dog’s latest destruction of your garden is not so easily ignored.

 Other Marketing Technology—New, Fast Changing, and Experimental

 It is impractical for a book like this to address the newest, fast- developing tech media, particularly those for which the jury is still out about its sustainability and true effectiveness. Some marketing technologies prove short-lived for many different reasons. I lived through a relatively brief boom for 900-numbers, during which books were pumped out, seminars held, gurus anointed, services sold, peer pressure to use intense, and a stampede to use achieved—yet it was all over within a hurry. More recently, there was a similar gold rush to Internet radio. For a short while, it was The Next Big Thing every

-----

##### marketer was talking about and many of my clients were enthralled with. As I write this, the bloom is off this rose for many, and more are more fascinated with Internet television.

 As I write this, marketing through mobile devices is the hottest new trend. Creating apps, text messaging, delivery of voice messages to cell phones, and other direct-to-smart-devices communication are all being hastily embraced by marketers large and small, with results varying widely. Some of this will sort itself out in just a matter of months, some will go away in short order, some may develop into a staple.

 In its totality, technology and tech media gives you, the marketer, opportunities, advantages, and hazards.