###### As customers scroll down your page, it’s okay to use more words than you are using in your header, but by more I really mean a few more sentences here and there. Some of the most effective websites I’ve reviewed have used ten sentences or less on the entire page. That’s the equivalent of about ten tweets or one press conference with Bill Belichick.
 If you do want to use a long section of text to explain something (we do it on our site, in fact), just place a little “read more” link at the end of the first or second sentence in a section of the website down the page a bit so people can expand the text if they like. That way you aren’t bombarding customers with too much text.
 As an experiment, let’s see if you can cut half the words out of your current website. Can you replace some of your text with images? Can you reduce whole paragraphs into three or four bullet points? Can you summarize sentences into snappy sound bites? If so, make those changes soon. The rule is this: the fewer words you use, the more likely it is that people will read them.

##### STAY ON SCRIPT

###### There are more than five things to consider when building your website, of course, but if you added all the rest of the tips and strategies together, they wouldn’t make as big of a difference as getting these five things right.
 If you think about your StoryBrand BrandScript as a drum kit, think of your website as a drum solo. There shouldn’t be a single word, image, or idea shared on your website that doesn’t come from the sound bites generated by your BrandScript. The words you use in your marketing and messaging don’t have to be the exact text you have on your BrandScript, but the ideas should be the same. If you’re including messages on your website that don’t come from one of the categories of the SB7 framework, your customers will hear only noise.
 The big idea is to stay on script. People will engage your brand only after they hear, understand, and perhaps even unknowingly memorize your sound bites. If you want your words to spread, keep your sound bites short and relevant, then repeat them everywhere you can. If you do, you will engage more customers, and those customers will place more orders. Why?

-----

###### Not because your message is clever or even coercive but because you’ve finally made it clear.
 When you hit the “Create a StoryBrand Messaging and Marketing Campaign” button on your StoryBrand BrandScript at StoryBrand.AI, you will be asked several questions that will inform the creation a robust report including a tagline, one-liner, wireframed website, lead generator, follow-up emails, sales script, narrative scripts for YouTube videos and social media, podcast prompts and topics, bonus ideas to create urgency, upsell product ideas, plug-and-play social media posts, plus industry trends specific to your industry. The website wireframe our artificial intelligence will create includes a few more sections than I’ve included in this chapter, and you can edit your wireframe so it reads exactly how you want. Your wireframe can then be easily handed to a StoryBrand certified coach to be designed and executed so that it generates (or improves) sales.



-----

###### CHAPTER 15