## AND MEETS A GUIDE

#### StoryBrand Principle Three: Customers aren’t looking for another hero; they’re looking for a
 guide.

### Shakespeare was right—a person’s life is made up of many acts. As a book
###### writer, though, I prefer to see these acts as chapters. If you look back on your life, you’ll likely see them too. There is the chapter when you grew up poor and the chapter when you began to understand you could dream big and the chapter about the importance of family and relationships and the chapter in which you realize that giving is more fulfilling than getting and so on and so on. There is an evolution to our maturity, and when you look back, it’s a beautiful evolution. I believe one of the main miracles of life is the fact that we get to transform.
 No two lives are the same, yet we share common chapters. Every human being is on a transformational journey.
 It’s easy to recognize these chapters by their events, or what writer and story scholar James Scott Bell calls “doorways of no return.”[1] This might have been our parents’ divorce, our first crush, a rejection from somebody we loved, or having absolutely nailed the moonwalk when the crowd gathered around us at the junior high dance.
 In stories, events mark the beginnings and endings of our chapters. But if we look closer, we will see something else or, more accurately, somebody else.
 The events that define our chapters are often instigated or interpreted by mystical characters who help us along the way. Story scholars call these characters by many names, such as wizards or mentors or helpers. I choose

-----

###### to call these mystical characters guides—those who step into our lives and help us face our challenges so that we can overcome them and transform into better versions of ourselves.
 In his book The Seven Basic Plots, Christopher Booker describes how a guide is introduced into the story this way:

A hero or heroine falls under a dark spell which eventually traps them in some wintry state,
akin to a living death: physical or spiritual imprisonment, sleep, sickness or some other form
of enchantment. For a long time they languish in this frozen condition. Then a miraculous
act of redemption takes place, focused on a particular figure who helps to liberate the hero or
heroine from imprisonment. From the depths of darkness they are brought up into glorious

light.[2]

##### EVERY HERO IS LOOKING FOR A GUIDE

###### Our first guides came to us early. I’m talking about our mother and father, who loved us more than they loved themselves, who sacrificed for us and taught us the ways of the world. They taught us language and belonging and connection and our first words and letters and numbers. They read us stories about characters who faced troubles but showed courage. Later, many of our teachers and coaches played the role of guide by helping us understand the importance of working hard, and they taught us to believe we could accomplish more than we previously thought possible. For many of us, guides have included poets we’ve read, leaders who gave us a voice in the halls of power, therapists who helped us make sense of and solve our challenges, and yes, even brands that offered encouragement and tools that helped us overcome our challenges.
 Guides are important in stories because they are important in life. Every human being knows that the wisdom it takes to navigate life is passed down, that no human can figure it out on their own. If a hero solves her own problem in a story, the audience will find it difficult to suspend disbelief. Why? Because we intuitively know if she could solve her own problem, she wouldn’t have gotten into trouble in the first place. Storytellers use the guide character, then, to encourage the hero and equip them to win the day.
 You’ve seen the guide in nearly every story you’ve read, listened to, or watched: Frodo is helped by Gandalf, Katniss is guided by Haymitch, and Luke Skywalker is shown the way of a Jedi by the all-knowing Yoda.

-----

###### Hamlet was guided by his father’s ghost, just as Romeo was taught the ways of love by Juliet.
 Human beings wake up every morning self-identifying as the hero of their own story. They are troubled by external, internal, and philosophical conflicts, and they know they can’t solve these problems on their own. For this reason, all human beings are seeking guides. Certainly we are inspired by stories of other heroes overcoming great challenges, but what we really need when the conflict is rising in our own lives is not another hero—what we need is a guide.
 The fatal mistake many brands make, especially young brands who believe they have something to prove, is positioning themselves as the hero in the story rather than the guide. As I’ve already mentioned, a brand that positions itself as the hero is destined to lose.

 The Fatal Mistake
 The ramifications of positioning our brand as the hero could be fatal. Consider the launch of the music streaming service Tidal. Never heard of it? There’s a reason you likely haven’t. Rapper Jay-Z founded the company with a personal investment of a whopping $56 million and a mission to “get everyone to respect music again.”[3] Instead of being owned by music studios or tech companies, Tidal would be owned by musicians, allowing them to cut out the middleman and take their products directly to market. As a result, artists would be able to pocket more of the profits.
 It may sound like a good business idea (and it was), but Jay-Z failed to consider the mistake of positioning himself and other artists as the heroes. He rightly saw an injustice in the world of music—namely, that artists were not getting paid for their own work. Instead, the money was going to record labels. But in publicly positioning artists as the heroes fighting for a cause, he forgot that the artists weren’t the customers, the music-loving public was the customer. After all, were only artists going to buy music from each other? No. Under the StoryBrand framework, the customer must always be the hero and the brand must always play the guide.
 In the months leading up to the launch of Tidal, Jay-Z recruited sixteen well-known musicians who agreed to release exclusive content on his platform in exchange for a percentage of equity. In their multimillion-dollar rollout, the artists stood shoulder to shoulder at a press conference to explain their mission. Predictably, this is where everything fell apart.

-----

###### If only Jay-Z, in other ways a genius, had understood the age-old rules of story, he might have avoided walking into a minefield.
 “Water is free,” Jay-Z quipped. “Music is $6 but no one wants to pay for music.” He continued, somewhat confusingly, “You should drink free water from the tap—it’s a beautiful thing. And if you want to hear the most beautiful song, then support the artist.”[4]
 Social media, especially Twitter (now X), eviscerated Jay-Z and Tidal. Thousands reminded him to check with the people who paid his bills to discover water wasn’t actually free. Overnight, an artist who built his career speaking for the people sounded entitled. The public became nauseated listening to a row of famous multimillionaire musicians guilt-trip them into paying more for their music. The crucial mistake: Jay-Z failed to answer the one question lingering in the subconscious of every hero customer: How are you helping me win the day? Tidal existed to help the artists win the day, not customers. And so it failed to launch successfully. The real tragedy of Tidal is that both the product and the cause (an artist’s right to be paid for their work) are just causes. I actually subscribe to Tidal myself, not because I champion the rights of artists but because the streaming service contains larger downloads that make the music sound much, much better. How should Jay-Z have positioned Tidal? In my view, he should have positioned the existing streaming services as the villains because they are shrinking the sound the artists had created and shorting music lovers of the best possible experience. The artists could have talked endlessly about how they make music for the fans and that by streaming through Tidal, fans could finally hear music the way it was meant to be heard, the way the artist intended. The controlling idea behind the campaign could have been “Music the way it was mean to be heard” and could have been repeated in all forms of messaging and marketing, thus helping word spread about what makes Tidal different.
 In short, any message that can be framed as a contribution to a “power to the people” movement will trump any message that is framed as a “power to the powerful” money grab. Of course, a “power to the powerful” money grab was likely never in the mind of Jay-Z, yet we should all be careful about how our positioning is perceived by our hero customers. If our fans don’t believe we are fully doing business for them, they will move on to another brand.

-----

###### In fact, I had no interest in Tidal when I heard what the artists were doing to protect their own paychecks, but I signed up immediately when I found out you could listen to music online that rivaled the sound quality of vinyl. In other words, when I realized that Tidal was actually helping me, the hero customer, win the day, I bought the product.
 Jay-Z sold his majority interest in Tidal for $350 million, so he definitely didn’t lose. However, the streaming service should have sold for billions of dollars. There’s a lesson in the Tidal story for all of us: Positioning yourself as the hero devalues your offering. In fact, it would be a great private equity play to shop for brands with terrific products but mistakenly positioning themselves as heroes in the story. Anybody hunting for a business to buy could seek out businesses making the “hero mistake,” buy them cheap, change the messaging (and culture of the company) to position the brand as the guide, and then see a predictable increase in both revenue and the overall value of the business itself.
 Position your customer as the hero and your brand as the guide. If you don’t, your brand will struggle to survive. The hero is always the person pulling out their wallet to make a purchase. The hero is never the people who make the product. If you remember that, you are more likely to get your messaging (and your business strategy) right.
 The larger point here is simple: the day we stop losing sleep over our problems and start losing sleep over our customers’ problems is the day our business will transform into a brand customers love.

 Positioning Yourself as the Hero Makes You Look Weak
 Why should we never position ourselves as the hero? Because in stories, heroes are weak. If we are tempted to position our brand as the hero because heroes are strong and capable and the center of attention, we should think again about the nature of a hero. In stories, the hero is never the strongest character. Heroes are often ill-equipped and filled with self-doubt. They aren’t sure of themselves and they wonder if they have what it takes to get the job done. They are often reluctant to take action, having been thrown into the story rather than willingly engaging their challenges. In fact, it is my view that in a good story the hero should be the second- weakest character after the victim. The guide, however, is strong. The guide has already “been there and done that” and has conquered the hero’s challenge in their own backstory. Haymitch had already won the Hunger

-----

###### Games. Yoda had already transformed into a Jedi. They may have been weak at one time, but the guide now has the very characteristics and abilities the hero must attain to win the day.
 The guide is the character in the story who has the strength and the authority to help the hero win. Still, the story is not really about the guide despite the important role they play. The story must always be focused on the hero, and if a storyteller (or business leader) forgets this, the audience will get confused about who the story is really about and will lose interest. In fact, my wife and I went to see a movie in the theaters last year and were slightly disappointed as the credits rolled. We felt a slight cognitive dissonance that comes when a screenwriter didn’t quite get it right. What was wrong with the script? The guide transformed. By that I mean there was a hero who was up against a significant challenge, and instead of the guide only serving the hero’s story, the screenwriter thought it would give a greater sense of depth if the guide also experienced a little of their own transformation, a little unknowing, a little self-doubt. The treatment backfired. Why? Because the audience couldn’t figure out who the hero was and who the guide was. The guide must be strong and all-knowing. The guide must be confident, that way the spotlight is fully on the hero and their transformation. If both the hero and the guide are transforming in a story, who the heck is the story about?
 This idea that the guide must be strong and competent is best demonstrated in Walt Disney’s perennial hit movie Mary Poppins. In the timeless adaptation of P. L. Travers’s eight-book series of the same name, Mary Poppins is the guide. The father, George Banks, is actually the hero of the story, transforming from an uncaring, distracted, hard-nosed father into a soft, caring, and attentive dad in the end. Mary Poppins, however, guides the entire family into an empathetic reminder of the magic of childhood, shaping the children and the father to be engaged, compassionate, moral, and well-behaved. She does this with lessons of wisdom and perspective, all from a place of ultimate authority. In fact, in an early scene in the movie Mary Poppins uses a measuring tape to gauge the yawning chasm between the children’s need for development and her own authority as the guide. As she lifts the measuring tape to the height of the children, the tape reveals the children as “extremely stubborn and suspicious” and “rather inclined to giggle and doesn’t put things away,” respectively. When Mary Poppins

-----

###### measures herself, however, the magical tape declares her “practically perfect in every way.”
 In a confrontational scene near the end of the film, the hero, George Banks, confronts Mary Poppins, demanding that she explain herself and her actions. She stands looking down at the confused hero from the top of the stairs and exclaims that Mary Poppins does not explain herself to anybody.
 In the overall story of life, there are guides and there are heroes. I’m certainly not suggesting that you, as a brand, never offer to explain yourself; however, we should learn a thing or two from Mary Poppins: As guides, it is paramount we be competent and strong. The hero is counting on us to know more than they know and to have a solution to their greatest problem. The guide, then, must live in service of the hero, and if the guide is not competent, they are useless. Can you imagine a candidate running for president exclaiming, “I have always wanted to be president but I’ve never really believed in myself, nor do I know what I am doing, but if you vote for me I will try my hardest to figure it out.” This candidate would generate a great deal of interest and differentiate themselves from the rest of the field but ultimately would gain very few votes. When we look for a leader, we enjoy a backstory of transformation but a current demonstration of competency.
 That said, arrogance never serves anybody and is ultimately a sign of defensiveness and weakness. Mary Poppins is sure of her philosophy, sure of her plan, and sure of her mission—to transform the family into a healthy and functioning unit led by a patriarch who is engaged and compassionate —but she is not in the story to serve herself or her own transformation. She is in the story to serve the family. The problem in the Banks family was always the father, and by the end of the story, the problem is solved.
 The idea that the guide must serve the hero is true in business, in politics, and even in your own family. People are looking for a guide to help them, not another hero.
 Those who realize the epic story of life is not about them but actually about the people around them somehow win in the end. It’s counterintuitive, but it’s true. In fact, leaders who think the story of life is all about them may achieve temporary successes but are usually remembered in history’s narrative as villains. If you make the story about you, you will lose.

-----

##### THE TWO CHARACTERISTICS OF A GUIDE