##### This is a good example of an advertising message that could have been quite powerful if it weren’t for one fatal flaw. Let me explain.
 I was flying back from Rockford, Illinois, in my own private plane. I was about 50 miles from the Pal-Waukee airport where I was scheduled for an instrument landing even though the weather was perfect for flying. The air traffic controllers were unusually quiet as I approached Pal-Waukee. It was a bright clear day—one of those rare days when you could see for miles.
 As I got closer to Pal-Waukee, I could see off in the distance a big fire near Chicago’s O’Hare airport. I landed my plane, parked and walked into the airport office where I learned from a television broadcast that American Airlines flight 191 had just crashed on takeoff from O’Hare and that all its passengers had died. That was May 25, 1979, and it was one of those memories that remains indelibly etched in my mind.

 This ad had a major flaw. The entire first part was missing.

-----

##### The plane that crashed was a DC-10—one of McDonnell Douglas’s largest and most popular aircraft. Immediately after the crash, it was determined that there was a hydraulic problem that, under certain circumstances, could cause loss of control and consequently a crash. McDonnell Douglas quickly corrected the problem, but for a while all DC- 10s were grounded.
 If that weren’t enough, the DC-10 was involved in two more crashes within a relatively short period of time. The last two were unrelated to any fault of the airplane, but the stigma of the American Airlines crash was still on the mind of the public. McDonnell Douglas realized that it had to do something to offset the negative publicity.
 They picked Pete Conrad to act as spokesman in an advertisement to address the public’s concern. But instead of raising the objections of the plane crashes and then resolving the problem with the excellent copy that was written, the objection was totally ignored. The resulting ad was hollow. The following is the copy as it was written:
 Headline: “The more you learn about our DC-10, the more you know how great it really is.” Byline: Pete Conrad, Former Astronaut, Division Vice President, McDonnell Douglas

-----

##### Copy: I’ve watched airplanes and spacecraft take shape for much of my adult life. I’m certain that nothing made to fly has ever been designed or built to more exacting standards than our DC-10. Eighteen million engineering man-hours were invested in this plane’s development. That includes 14,000 hours of wind tunnel testing, as well as full-scale ‘fatigue testing’ for the equivalent of 40 years of airline service. I’m convinced that the DC-10 is the most thoroughly-tested jetliner ever built. Along with U.S. Government certification, the DC-10 has passed structure tests just as demanding, in their own way, as those required of U.S. Air Force fighter planes. The DC-10 fleet demonstrates its dependability flying more than a million miles a day and serving 170 cities in 90 countries around the globe. The ad then ended with a place to write McDonnell Douglas to get more information.
 The copy was good copy—very persuasive in terms of building confidence in the plane. And all this was presented by a former astronaut to add credibility. But it lacked an important opening that would have made the copy many times more effective.
 What if the ad had started out differently? If I were given the assignment of writing the ad, here’s the way it would go:
 Headline: DC-10’s Big Secret Subheadline: You’ve heard a lot of bad publicity about the DC-10. But here’s something you may not have known. Byline: By Pete Conrad Copy: It was horrible. When American Airlines flight 191 crashed at O’Hare in Chicago last May 25th, hundreds of people lost their lives in what was considered one of the worst plane crashes in American history. The plane—a DC-10. But as the facts emerged, it was learned that a series of coincidences resulted in a hydraulic malfunction that in all likelihood would never happen again. But it did happen. And in the subsequent weeks, a series of fail-safe systems were installed that make the DC-10’s hydraulic system among the safest of any jetliner.

-----

##### In addition, two other recent crashes of DC-10s were determined to be totally not the fault of the airplane but of the pilots. But because of the negative publicity generated by the American Airlines crash and these other two crashes, we have been even more diligent. All airlines are required to give each DC-10 a complete inspection every 50 hours instead of the required 100 hours of flying. The plane’s hydraulic system is checked before each flight instead of waiting until a required inspection. And the plane’s structural system is checked not only by each mechanic but by the pilots themselves. You couldn’t fly a safer plane. Then I would pick up the copy from the existing ad so it would continue,
 I’ve watched airplanes and spacecraft take shape for much of my adult life. I’m certain that nothing made to fly has ever been designed or built to more exacting standards than our DC-10. The rest of the original copy would follow. Do you see the difference? What I have done is to raise the real problem (or as I call it, the “objection”) and then resolve it. Conrad’s copy, which could easily go at the end of my ad, would then contribute to resolving the problem.
 After reading my version of the ad, you would leave with a positive feeling about both the company and the message. You would think, “That was a sincere effort to dispel those false impressions on the safety of the DC-10.” The message is an emotional presentation that shows concern, integrity and leadership.
 Now compare that with the way the ad was originally written, which might have left you with the sarcastic impression, “Sure it’s a safe plane. . . .” Or maybe, “They are just trying to cover themselves from all the heat they’ve been taking.”
 Keep in mind that the copy they had was very good. They just left off the entire front end of the ad and were avoiding the real issue—the events that actually happened that prompted their ad. They just spent most of their copy resolving the objection without acknowledging and addressing it directly.
 The lesson to be learned here is to realize the importance of raising an objection, regardless of how embarrassing or detrimental it may seem, and then doing your best to resolve it. You’ll find that the public really appreciates your candor, honesty and frankness and will respond to your message in a positive way, whether it be to buy your product, to develop a

-----

##### good feeling about your company or, as in the case of the DC-10, to restore confidence in an airplane.

####

-----

# Chapter 27

 A More Stimulating Way

##### Even if you never wrote a piece of copy in your life, one look at this ad from Sony Video Communications and you would feel pretty much like the cartoon character shown in it. You’d feel like falling asleep.
 The advertising agency that created this ad probably thought they had a very clever idea. Their concept—show the contrast between typical types of boring communications and a new, more stimulating video presentation (new back in the mid-1970s when this ad appeared).
 In keeping with the theme, the headline in the ad was inadvertently boring in that it was hard to read with its dense capitalized type. The ad layout was boring. And finally, the copy was monotonous and did not follow many of my principles. So whoever created this ad was certainly being consistent with the theme in their presentation. It was boring.

 The theme of this ad was “boring.” They accomplished their goal.

-----

##### But being consistent while going in the wrong direction is not a great strategy, either. Very few people would want to read a boring ad. There are thousands of ad messages out there on a daily basis, and to stand out you need a message that grabs people’s attention and causes them to read your entire ad. And to get them to read your entire ad, you must use many of the techniques I’ve presented throughout this book, even if the ad you are creating is not a mail order ad.
 In the Sony ad they are first trying to sell the concept of using video and then of using Sony video, once they have convinced their reader to try this new medium. My approach would have been to create a story of somebody who switched to video and saw a dramatic benefit—more sales, greater productivity or more awareness.
 Here are the first few paragraphs to give you the sense of how the copy flowed. The ad had no subheadline, no cartoon caption and started out with a very long and boring first sentence.
 Every day, American business spews forth a virtually endless stream of inter-office memos, conference reports, training manuals, brochures, telexes, phone calls, slide shows, letters, telegrams, direct mail pieces, annual reports, press releases and newsletters. The average employee is deluged with communication. And there is no way of telling how much of it is either ignored, forgotten, misplaced or summarily disposed of. In short, American business is in the throes of a vast and complex communication crisis. A problem that today—in an age of shortened attention spans and heightened communications costs—cries out for an efficient and imaginative solution. The first sentence is too long and the copy is boring. But then again, isn’t “boring” the theme of the ad? (I’m being facetious.)
 The ad then tells how video is being used and what Sony has to offer the new and emerging industry. If you thought the first few paragraphs were boring, so was the rest of the copy. And since I get bored typing it into my computer for this book, I’m not going to include any more for you to read. Just trust me—it was boring.

-----

##### Chances are, unless you were totally interested in video communications and were actively searching for everything you could find on the subject, you wouldn’t even consider reading the entire ad.
 And here’s my final point. The ad was created by a professional ad agency using professional copywriters, layout artists and art directors. After reading this book, you could act as a consultant to that ad agency and improve its advertising by 1,000 percent and you may not even be a professional anything. The ability to write good advertising copy is not limited exclusively to professionals. Often even the most inexperienced person can write an incredibly effective ad. And certainly after reading this book, you can criticize even the most professionally prepared ads.

####

-----

# Chapter 28

 Magic Baloney

##### This JS&A mail order ad for the Magic Stat thermostat basically tells a story but with a unique twist. The story starts out with us hating the product, and then as the story unfolds, the product takes a quantum leap in our approval to become the best product on the planet. How I get there is an interesting process.
 First I realized that the number one drawback in purchasing a thermostat is the installation. It’s not one of those things that consumers relate to. It could be dangerous handling all those wires and there’s a lot of extra expense in having an installer put one in. So one of the first good features we finally like in our story is the ease of installation. In short, we recognize that consumers don’t like to be bothered with installation and we hit this feature early in the ad.

 I brought out the worst aspects of this product and turned them around.

-----

##### The copy itself raises many objections—the case design, the look of it and even the name. We realized that these would be some of the same objections consumers would raise when they looked at the product. And we resolved them one by one as we floated through the copy.
 A good portion of the copy explained in a light sort of way the features of the product. And then near the end we built up the company selling us the product to add credibility and make the consumer feel more secure. Our competition, after all, was Honeywell—a company with an established name and reputation.
 The Magic Stat ad ran in print for almost three years starting in 1983 and made the product into a very successful brand name. The company eventually was sold to Honeywell.
 The following is the complete text of the ad:
 Headline: Magic Baloney Subheadline: You’ll love the way we hated the Magic Stat thermostat until an amazing thing happened. Caption: It had no digital readout, an ugly case and a stupid name. It almost made us sick. Copy: You’re probably expecting our typical sales pitch, but get ready for a shock. For instead of trying to tell you what a great product the Magic Stat thermostat is, we’re going to tear it apart. Unmercifully. When we first saw the Magic Stat, we took one look at the name and went, “Yuck.” We took one look at the plastic case and said, “How cheap looking.” And when we looked for the digital readout, it had none. So before the salesman even showed us how it worked, we were totally turned off.

####

-----

# REAL LOSER

##### So there it was—at first blush a real loser. But wait, we did find one good feature—a feature that led us to a discovery. The Magic Stat installs in a few minutes and no serviceman is required. Thermostat wires in your wall follow standard color codes. So when you install Magic Stat, you attach the red wire to the red location and the white to the white. That’s play school stuff. And it’s safe. Conventional thermostats installed over the past 20 years are generally only 24 volts, so you can either turn off the power or work with the “live” wires without fear.

####

-----

# OK, LET’S TEST IT

##### The Magic Stat installation was so easy that the least we could do was test it. And that’s when we made an incredible discovery. We discovered that the Magic Stat was probably the most consumer- oriented, technologically-advanced and most sophisticated thermostat ever developed on the face of this earth and in our galaxy for all times ever. What made us switch from hating the thing to loving it? Read the following: The Magic Stat has six setback settings per day and a seven day program. That means that you could set it for 70 degrees when you get up in the morning, drop the temperature to 54 degrees when you go to work, raise it to 68 degrees when you return for dinner, raise it up to 70 degrees after dinner as you watch TV and then drop it down to 62 degrees when you go to sleep. Count them—five settings with one to spare. In one day the Magic Stat is programmed for the whole week and for the weeks to come. If you want a different schedule for weekends, you can individually program the thermostat for those days, too. “Big deal,” you might think. “What’s so great about that?” Read on. You set most electronic setback thermostats to the time you want the furnace to go on in the morning, so when you wake up, your room is once again warm. But what if one morning it’s bitter cold outside and the next morning it’s much warmer? This means that setting your furnace to go on at the same time may, on one morning, leave you cold and on the next morning cause you to waste energy by warming up your house too soon. By golly, the Magic Stat has everybody beat on this one too. Throughout the night it senses and computes the drop in temperature and the time it will take to get your room to your exact wake-up temperature. So if you want to wake up at 7 AM to 70 degrees—that’s the temperature you’ll wake up to every time. Because it’s a patented concept, no other thermostat has this feature. But wait. There is also a patent on the setting feature.

-----

####

-----

# SIMPLE TO SET