##### You don’t have to give up your job. But you may soon be making so much money that you’ll be able to. Once again—I guarantee it. The wisest man I ever knew told me something I never forgot: “Most people are too busy earning a living to make any money.” Don’t take as long as I did to find out he was right. I’ll prove it to you, if you’ll send in the coupon now. I’m not asking you to “believe” me. Just try it. If I’m wrong, all you’ve lost is a couple of minutes and an 8-cent stamp. But what if I’m right? It is interesting to see the cost of a first class stamp back in 1973. Today as I write this book a stamp costs 39 cents, so the cost of his book relative to the cost of a postage stamp was equivalent to $50 in today’s dollars.
 Then you examine the coupon. But right above the coupon you first read a sworn statement from his accountant:
 “I have examined this advertisement. On the basis of personal acquaintance with Mr. Joe Karbo for 18 years and my professional relationship as his accountant, I certify that every statement is true.” (Accountant’s name available upon request.) He also includes his bank reference. Once again, this really is very convincing as prior to Karbo, nobody had ever put anything like this in an ad. He was strongly establishing his credibility by using the bank’s name as an indirect testimonial to his honesty—something his prospects needed in order to feel confident to reach for their checkbooks and send him their hard-earned money.
 The coupon is a summary of the offer.
 Joe, you may be full of beans, but what have I got to lose? Send me the Lazy Man’s Way to Riches. But don’t deposit my check or money order for 31 days after it’s in the mail. If I return your material—for any reason—within that time, return my uncashed check or money order to me. On that basis, here’s my ten dollars. He even has a small box you can check if you want his “material” sent by airmail for only one dollar more.
 Note that he is sending “material” and not just a book. “Material” makes the program appear much more valuable—more like a course as opposed to a book. It has much more sizzle than just saying “book.”

-----

##### If you sent in your money, you received a wonderful book that actually looked like it cost about 50 cents to print. But it contained both a motivational message and the direct marketing techniques necessary to make money the “Lazy Man’s Way.”
 Karbo ran these ads for several years. I had been establishing the fact in my national advertising that there was no such thing as too many words. By 1973 we were really cranking out our advertising, but mostly in the Wall Street Journal. One year later when we advertised in many national magazines, we noticed that Karbo’s copy was expanding to include testimonials and more examples to cover the broad market he was trying to reach. The ads became more wordy with each passing year.
 But it was Joe’s very first ad—the first major mass market advertising campaign to come from the income opportunity area in many years—that was the purest example of what I was teaching in my seminar.
 Joe Karbo attended my seminar in 1978. At my seminar he shared his background and told the story of how he wrote this one ad.
 Joe died in 1980 from a massive heart attack. He was being interviewed at a local TV station near his home in California when the interviewer decided to unfairly attack Joe, thus changing entirely the premise of the interview. Joe’s first reaction was a heart attack from which he never revived. Joe was survived by his wife Betty and eight children.
 His work and efforts have been continued in an excellent recently revised version of his book (by Richard Gilly Nixon) including a workbook. Any student of mail order needing some really good motivation should purchase it. Please see the listing in Appendix D for this course as well as several other good direct marketing books.
 The Karbo ad was a classic. It was his biggest and best shot in the mail order business and its significance was felt by the many millions who bought his book and later indeed profited by it. But if this seemed like a real fluke—a once-in-a-lifetime experience that would be impossible to duplicate—you’re wrong. It is happening even as you read this, with other entrepreneurs using direct marketing as a method to market their products.
 The next true story tells of somebody who never wrote print mail order copy before he sat down and wrote one of the classic long-running mail order ads of the decade, and he did it right after attending my seminar. Read on.

-----

####

-----

# Chapter 24

 A Fluke of Nature

##### Frank Lewis Schultz is a farmer who grows grapefruit in the Rio Grande Valley of Texas. For years he had used a simple letter or direct mailing to build his customer base into a nice-sized business that sold grapefruit by mail. But something always seemed to elude him. He couldn’t get print mail order advertising to work for him.
 He realized that space advertising (the idea of reaching millions of people for the same price it takes to reach thousands by mail) sounded like a great concept. And along with reaching millions, he could add credibility to his company and more profit to his bottom line.
 It all sounded great until Schultz hired one of the nation’s most respected direct response agencies. The first ad bombed. So did the second. In fact, his gross sales didn’t cover the raw cost of the ad space. Schultz was discouraged.

 It was Frank’s first ad and it became a classic.

-----

##### When I announced my first seminar in 1977, Schultz was one of the first to sign up. During the seminar, he was very quiet, but he seemed to be absorbing everything I had to say. I didn’t know at the time that he had a degree in marketing from the University of California at Berkeley.
 After the seminar, with the information fresh in his mind, he went to the local Holiday Inn in Minocqua, Wisconsin, and started drafting his first print ad.
 He based it on both the successful letter that he had run for years and the information I had taught. And the result was sent to me in Northbrook, Illinois, upon my return home after the seminar.
 The ad was great. It wasn’t the very technical style of the JS&A ads, but it had a homespun feel that grabbed you at the start and drew you through the copy all the way to the very end. As Frank later said about the seminar and what he had learned about writing copy, “It was actually pretty easy because suddenly everything was clear. I knew what I had to say and how to say it. I learned that you don’t have to be a professional copywriter to write effective copy.”
 When I received Schultz’s ad, I called him on the phone and told him, “Your ad is great. I only have a few changes to suggest but they are minor. Your big problem is the headline.” I suggested “Fluke of Nature” instead of “A Stroke of Luck from Mother Nature”—the one he had written. I

-----

##### suggested the subheadline: “A new grapefruit discovery may change your concept of fruit.” I also suggested he take out a line, “The zesty flavor of Royal Ruby Red grapefruit juice will help start your day with a smile,” as it seemed almost a cliché—something an ad agency might have written. And there were several other small changes, but again, they were minor.
 There were two pictures captioned with copy explaining the offer, and of course all the elements were designed to get you to read the first sentence. Let’s examine the copy as we did with the Karbo ad and see how Schultz captured the essence of what I taught, and in a very simple yet persuasive way. The copy starts out with a first paragraph that was printed in bold type to act almost as a subheadline, thus drawing you further into the copy:
 I’m a farmer. And the story I tell you is the absolute truth, as incredible as it may seem. This is a classic opening for an ad. Remember we talked about how each word has an emotion and a story attached to it? What does the word farmer bring to mind? How about honesty, hard work and integrity? Simply by stating that he is a farmer, he has established a degree of credibility right from the start of the ad. And then look at the curiosity he creates right away in the second sentence. How could you not continue?
 It all started in a grove owned by Dr. Webb, our family doctor. One of the men who was picking fruit in the doctor’s orchard came up to the Webb house holding six of the strangest grapefruit anyone had ever seen. A single branch of an ordinary grapefruit tree had produced these six unusual fruit. These were big grapefruit, unusually big. And they had a faint red blush on their skin. When Dr. Webb sliced open the grapefruit, the fruit was a brilliant ruby red in color. Dr. Webb decided to taste this strange new grapefruit. The fruit was perfect, juicy and luscious. It wasn’t sour like other grapefruit either—it was naturally sweet without sugar. For some reason, we’ll never know why, nature had chosen to produce an entirely new kind of grapefruit here in our Magic Rio Grande Valley. It was incredible—men had labored for years to produce the ideal grapefruit, and had failed. But suddenly on a single branch of one tree in one grove, Mother Nature had done it all by herself!

-----

##### The copy reads almost like a fairy tale with the use of the Magic Rio Grande Valley name and the story of this unexpected discovery. Schultz created this environment—all woven through a compelling and interesting story that holds your attention and keeps you reading. You can’t stop now. You’ve got to see where this all takes you. Schultz now goes into more detail on the fruit itself. And he uses one technique that you would never believe could be applied to fruit. He makes his product a rarity—a limited edition to be shared by very few people. Read the following and see what I mean.

####

-----

# YOU CAN IMAGINE THE
 EXCITEMENT

##### From the fruit on that one branch, grove after grove now produces our own Texas Ruby Red Grapefruit. When I say, “Not one man in a thousand has ever tasted this grapefruit”—you can easily understand why. To begin with, Ruby Reds are rare. You can look for them in stores but I doubt if you’ll find one. You may find pink grapefruit, but seldom if ever do you see the genuine Ruby Reds. So you start with the rarity of Ruby Reds, and to get to ROYAL Ruby Reds you have to get rarer yet. Only 4 to 5 percent of the entire crop will qualify as a “Royal Ruby Red.” Schultz graphically brought out the true rarity of what he was selling. You can certainly do that with a collectible, but the simple way Schultz made his fruit rare was ingenious. After he told you that “not one man in a thousand has ever tasted this grapefruit,” you might have thought he was going to pitch you on the fruit. Instead he started to explain what makes it even more rare. And it got so rare that it seemed quite plausible that few people indeed have tasted this fruit.
 In the next passage, Schultz continues to build the story but now he makes his message a very personal one. It almost sounds like he goes right into the grove with his men to pick the fruit. He is personally involved in every step of the growing and picking process, and he uses this approach to make his message personal. Secondly, he even uses a technical explanation —something that really builds confidence in the expertise he brings to his farming. A technical explanation in selling electronics would make sense, but see how he does it here with a very nonscientific product—grapefruit. And he also gets you totally involved with the fruit itself. Your taste buds are activated and you can almost savor the grapefruit as you read the copy. He is actually using your sense of taste as an involvement device. Instead of turning the knobs of a TV set or clicking on the keys of a calculator to involve you, he’s getting you to salivate. The copy continues:

-----

##### Each Royal Ruby Red weighs a pound—or more! Each has a rich red color, flowing juices, luscious naturally sweet flavor, and the ability to stay this way for many weeks. Why, we won’t even consider harvesting a grove until I’ve checked out the fruit for tree-ripened maturity myself. I check for “natural sugar,” low acid balance and high juice content. I check to see that the fruit is plump and meaty, and I even check to see that the skin is thin. Not only does each factor have to check out, but all the factors have to be in a proper relationship to each other before I’ll harvest a grove. And when we pick the fruit, we’re just as fussy. Every one of us takes a “picking ring” when we harvest. If the fruit is small enough to pass through this ring—we don’t pick it! It simply isn’t big enough to qualify as a Royal Ruby Red! Even after picking there are other careful inspections each fruit must pass before I’ll accept it. I size the fruit. And I grade it for beauty. Sometimes the fruit will be wind scarred. I won’t accept it. Or sometimes it will have a bulge on the stem that we call “sheep nose.” I won’t accept it. You can see I really mean it when I say I accept only perfect Royal Ruby Reds. By now you can just picture Frank Schultz out in the grove with his picking ring rejecting wind-scarred grapefruit or fruit that has sheep nose. By now you are actually convinced that this fruit is very carefully selected —chosen not only for its juice content but also for its beauty. Beauty? Yep, beauty.
 Probably the one thing that he uses with great skill is the personal nature of his presentation. His company sounds small—as if it is made up of just Schultz and a few other pickers. And they all go out with their picking rings, spend the day gathering only the prettiest and juiciest grapefruit, and then return with their harvest for shipping to just a few of their customers the next day. It is a beautiful example of the personal one-to-one selling technique that you want to capture in print, and Schultz has managed to do this in a very simple and masterful way.
 Think also about the nature of grapefruit. This is unquestionably a simple product and this chapter is a good example of my “simple versus complicated” rule. When something is simple, like a grapefruit, you make it complex. If it’s complex, you make it simple. What could be more simple

-----