##### Press releases are a means of disseminating information to various media where the information is published at no charge. It’s free and sometimes can provide great value.
 But wait. There is a risk—the chance that the person publishing what you send may distort the message in a rewrite. It’s a two-edged sword. In general, though, this free publicity is a positive thing and can be used very effectively either as the sole way to market a product or part of a campaign.
 First, let’s make sure that we put the proper heading at the very top of the paper so the person receiving the message knows that it’s for public relations (PR). My suggestion is to put “News Release” at the top—“Press Release” has gotten old hat.
 I would then put the date and the words “For Immediate Release” in the top right-hand corner of the release. Giving a later release date is also acceptable but very rare.
 Next, I would come up with a headline and subheadline that would appeal to the readers of the publication receiving the release.
 Then put the city of origin for the news release, similar to the way news stories appear in a newspaper: something like “(Chicago, IL) A major new breakthrough . . .”
 The news release should be written like a news story, complete with as much detail at the beginning as possible. Within a few paragraphs all the salient points should be encapsulated so an editor or any reader can get the gist of what you’re saying very quickly. Use the typical who, what, when, where, why and how at the very beginning of your release.
 Remember you are appealing to the editor to view what you are sending as news and not a puff piece promoting your company or its product. The editor wants to make sure that the piece is relevant to the publication’s audience.
 You can use quotes in the release that can be attributed to experts who will say things about your product or service that you can’t say in the body of your release. “John Jackson, chairman of the company making the Bone Fone, says, ‘Never before in the history of sound has a product this novel been introduced.’ ” A quote like this has to be attributed to someone, so use

-----

##### the device as an opportunity to include testimonials, statements from the president of the company or other comments that enhance the news in your article.
 Psychological triggers that play an important role in a news release are “linking” and “current fads.” If there is a fad sweeping the country, see if you can cleanly link into it with your product or service. For example, in the 1960s at the height of the women’s liberation movement, my ski resort account asked if I could help promote its snowmobile rental business through PR. It seems that nobody realized that snowmobiles could be rented at this ski resort.
 The hottest fad or trend at the time was the women’s liberation movement, and tying it into my client’s wishes, I came up with a headline, “Ski Resort Bans Woman Snowmobile Drivers.” The subheadline then explained the ban in more detail: “Schuss Mountain Ski Resort in northern Michigan claims women snowmobile drivers are causing too many accidents so owner bans all women from using them.”
 The release that followed was brief. It didn’t have to be too long. I quoted Dan Iannotti, the owner of the resort, as saying, “There’s nothing worse than a woman behind the wheel of a snowmobile.”
 Iannotti had an open mind and thought the idea was clever enough to possibly make a big splash, so he approved it. All hell broke loose after it was released to the local media. The release made the national network news shows and the front page of many newspapers and became one of the most discussed topics on the talk shows. I had indeed linked into a strong trend that helped my client get out his message.
 The snowmobile rentals jumped at the resort—of course not before we issued another release a week later with the headline “Ban Lifted at Ski Resort” and subheadline “Because of the pressure, Schuss Mountain ski resort lifts ban on women snowmobilers”—and all this was followed by text that explained the change of heart by the owner after a number of women complained about the ban. “We have set up a school to teach good snowmobile habits,” said Iannotti in the text of the release.
 A friend of mine had a product that he sold using only PR. It was a device that he put over his toilet and onto which a cat climbed to use the toilet. I’m not kidding. And the product worked. But he couldn’t advertise it in any magazine as they all were repulsed by the thought of advertising this type of

-----

##### product. He then resorted to PR and was able to get national publicity more easily than he could from trying to advertise it.
 This is not meant to be a resource on PR principles but rather some of the principles that could apply to a news release sent to a publication or TV network. Realize that as a copywriter, your role here is to look at your copy as news editors would and write it to fit their model of what a good news story should reflect.

####

-----

# Radio

##### Radio draws on the imaginations of your listeners to get a strong, personal message across. And radio is negotiable and often not very expensive, making it a good part of an advertiser’s mix.
 To make radio work, you need frequency. You can have a great radio spot but unless it is repeated often enough, it won’t be as effective.
 As with TV, you can buy many different forms of radio. A radio spot is typically from 10 seconds to 60 seconds in duration, and there is also the long-form radio commercial referred to as “brokered time.” This is where the advertiser buys the time slot (usually a half hour to an hour) and uses it just like a talk show to promote his or her own business. It might be a real estate show, an investment program or even a show on health.
 Los Angeles advertising guru and radio copywriter Dan O’Day says that it is vital to have only one message to convey to the listener in the typical radio spot, and that should be what he calls the “core message.”
 “Radio is the most personal of all mass media. You listen to the message in a linear fashion one statement after the next,” says O’Day.
 O’Day points out that radio is also a very visual medium in the sense that the listener has to imagine what is being described. For example, if a child is described as beautiful, the listener pictures a child he or she considers to be beautiful. If this was done on TV and a child was shown, there might be a credibility gap. The child visualized by the radio listener may be personally more beautiful to him or her than the actual one seen on TV.
 If you are doing a direct response radio spot, one of the most important elements is the toll-free number. Is it easy to remember? Most radio listeners are driving their cars, and others just may not have a pen and paper handy. Some advertisers are using words instead of numbers to make it easy to remember. For example, 1-800-FLOWERS or 1-800-CARPETS or even 1-800-BLUBLOCKER. These make great radio phone numbers.
 In the case of the BluBlocker number, there are a few extra letters in BluBlocker (9 instead of the correct 7) but that’s okay as it doesn’t matter to the phone company if you punch a few more keys after you dial the number, and besides, it’s easy to remember. But you’ve got to be careful that people spell the phonetic version of your number correctly. For example, many

-----

##### people have typed in 1-800-BLUEBLOCKER by mistake, spelling “blue” correctly even though it is not the actual spelling of the brand. So we arranged for both the correct and the incorrect numbers to be directed to the same phone line. We assumed in advance that sometimes it was going to be misspelled and therefore prepared for it.
 The second thing to remember with a direct response spot is that the start of the spot is critical for people to stay tuned and pay attention. So you might start out with a curiosity trigger such as, “I’ve got some important news for those of you who are concerned about the bird flu.” Radio is a music and news medium. The more you therefore make your message sound like news, the more compatible your message is with the medium.
 Dick Orkin was known in the 1970s, 1980s, and 1990s for his humorous spots. They told a story. And the humor was not for the sake of being funny —more for the fact that it grabbed you and lent a human tone to the message. In the 1960s and early 1970s radio personality Stan Freberg produced some funny spots, too. But the spots from both Orkin and Freberg had that single core message that came across loud and clear.
 Take the commercial from Motel 6. “We’ll leave the light on for ya” was the tagline at the end of those spots. But the core message, according to O’Day, “was not that well-recalled slogan but that Motel 6 had the lowest room rates—actually the lowest room rates of any national chain.” And it also had a very personal message recited by Tom Bodett. Radio became Motel 6’s primary advertising medium.
 I’ve used radio very effectively during my entire advertising career. More recently, I have used radio to promote my BluBlocker sunglasses brand. Since BluBlocker is already an established sunglasses brand, I used radio to draw attention to where you could buy BluBlockers. It’s a product worn in good weather, so I sponsored the weather and traffic reports. The announcer would always have a captive audience wanting to hear this information so I had the perfect environment for my message. The announcer would start out, “The traffic and weather are brought to you by BluBlocker high- resolution sunglasses. Get BluBlockers at your local Walgreens Drug Store.” In just a few seconds I was able to get across my core message, “Get your BluBlockers at Walgreens.” And those spots worked very well for us through daily repetition.
 As a copywriter, realize that radio is among the most personal of all media with a core message—simple, clean and easy to comprehend.

-----

####

-----

# Television

##### Writing copy for TV follows many of the same principles you’ve learned in this book, but the copy will vary by length of the commercial. Now that might seem obvious but let me explain further.
 I have had personal experience and both success and failure in all of the various TV formats we will discuss. I have sold millions of pairs of sunglasses and other products on infomercials, home shopping channels and TV spots. I have tested all elements of a TV commercial and know what works and what doesn’t. What you read here should act as an excellent guideline on how to write copy for TV because it is presented by somebody with extensive personal experience in all of the various TV formats.
 Some of the facts mentioned will have more to do with marketing than copywriting. But as a copywriter you would be wasting your time writing copy for a TV spot that won’t work because it is violating some important marketing principle. So in a sense, knowing a little about marketing in this very powerful category is very important to the copywriter.
 Let’s start with the TV spot commercial or what is called short-form TV, which can be anywhere from 30 seconds to two minutes long, and go over six of the copywriting and marketing points you’ll need to know to successfully write copy for this format.
 1. Typically the most effective way to determine if your product is suitable for this form of advertising is price point. If your product is an impulse item (defined as being in the $29.95 or less retail price category), then chances are this might be an appropriate format to sell your product. 2. The next criterion should be value. It must appear almost too good to be true. Greed will play a role here. Your customers must feel that they are getting a bigger value than they believe possible. They must subconsciously think, “How can they do it?” 3. Simplicity is extremely important, too. Keeping the offer simple and uncomplicated is critical. Anything that complicates the commercial will lose sales. The only exception to this rule is near the end of the spot when you start adding on additional items to increase the value. For example, “If you call within the next 20 minutes, I’ll also include

-----

##### an extra mixer free of charge. That’s two mixers for $19.95.” Don’t give the prospect a choice to make. There should be only one choice —“Buy this product now and get all of this.” Don’t offer different colors or sizes. It’s one offer and no choices. Only when your prospects call on the phone do you “upsell” them to other items or offer various versions or multiples of the same offer. 4. Use a sense of urgency. You need to make sure that the prospect doesn’t copy the phone number down with the idea of purchasing your product later on, because chances are he or she won’t. Like the preceding, using greed as a motivator and a time limit to respond works wonders. 5. Include a web site address. Many viewers will copy both the toll-free number and the web site address and then go to their computers. People are different. Some like to buy on the phone, others through the mail and still others on the Internet. You want to appeal to all of them. Some prospects may get turned off when they call to order a product and reach somebody in another country who speaks with an unintelligible accent. They may decide to hang up and buy the item on the Internet. It has happened to me. And with so much of our service industry being exported to other countries, the Web might be a logical place to buy. 6. Your product must appeal to a mass market: all women, all men, both men and women over the age of 40 or large segments of the general public. After all, TV reaches a mass market and unless your product appeals to the masses you are wasting a lot of money reaching your target market. For example, I have run spots for my BluBlocker sunglasses and have done quite well. Why? They appeal to a mass audience of both men and women and almost all age groups. Sunglasses are a mass market product. If your product fits the preceding criteria, then you’ve got a good chance at succeeding in this medium. Your approach now is to determine how to write a spot that is compelling, stops the viewer and makes an offer that provides a real benefit to the consumer.
 Once again, the same principles of copywriting apply to a TV spot. But in a spot you have to literally count your words, making them reach the point quickly while presenting your product and its benefits in the proper environment.

-----

##### You create the environment by the visuals. If you’re selling a kitchen appliance, use a kitchen as your background. If you’re selling an automobile dent remover, show a homeowner at home removing the dents from his or her moderately priced car. Remember that you are reaching the masses and use props that identify and are typical for that market.
 Focus on the core message you want to convey. Every word and every visual element have to lead the viewer to the final buying conclusion. If you offer bonuses, make sure the bonus you offer is something the same audience would want. You don’t want to give a free gift of something that a portion of the audience may not care for. What this does is deter them from buying the product they intended on buying because they feel they are paying for something they don’t want.
 I recently saw a TV spot offering a very small table to be used whenever you needed to work or eat while watching TV. The free bonus gift was a cloth TV remote holder that you would drape over the side of your chair. Even though logically the cloth remote holder made sense because the table would be used primarily for TV, this was a bad idea. First, your chair may not have a side to it. Secondly, many viewers may not care for the free gift anyway and would reject the main offer because in their minds they would be paying more for something they didn’t want.
 The key in all these offers is to test the free gift versus no gift and maybe against another gift. It is during the testing process that you find out what really works, and it is often not what you expected.

####

-----

# The Infomercial