##### Later, as consumers understood more and the products became a commodity, explaining them in greater detail proved more effective.
 In addition to the concept of simple versus complex, you should always check your copy to make sure you have explained all of the features. Ask yourself, “Did I explain the product sufficiently to my prospect?” You might ask a number of people to read your copy to see if they understand the product and its features. Look at the questions they raise and see if you’ve addressed them fully in your copy.
 6. New Features: Highlight those features that make your product or service new, unique or novel. This might appear to be the same as the copy element “Product Explanation” that we’ve just discussed, but it is different. Here you are revealing not just the features of the product, but the features that distinguish it from anything else on the market. 7. Technical Explanation: Regardless of the product or service, each ad can be enhanced with a technical explanation. We all like to buy something from an expert—somebody we like, respect and trust. Buying is indeed a process of trust. The buyer’s thought process might be, “I trust that you really know your subject and fully understand the product category and have described your product to me properly and will give me something of value that I want in return for my hard-earned money.” Trust is always enhanced when the seller has become an expert at what he or she is selling. Let’s say the seller says, “I have studied everything I could on competitive products and know everything there is about the product I am selling, so I know that what I am offering you is the best product at the best value.” You would naturally have a great deal of confidence that this seller’s product is indeed good.

 A technical explanation will build confidence in the prospect.

-----

##### You might also be impressed if the seller, in describing the product, used words that you didn’t understand. Why? Because it would appear that the seller really was an expert about the product. This is not deception. A seller must become an expert on the product in order to talk about it in technical language.
 In a mail order ad, technical explanations can add a great deal of credibility, but before you write them, make sure you indeed become an expert. If not, the consumer will see right through the ploy.
 A good example of this technique is expressed in the following caption I wrote for a picture of the integrated circuit in a watch:
 A pin points to the new decoder/driver integrated circuit which takes the input from the oscillator countdown integrated circuit and computes the time while driving the display. This single space-age device replaces thousands of solid-state circuits and provides the utmost reliability—all unique to Sensor. Very few people would be able to understand the technical commentary. In fact, when I sent the ad to the manufacturer for approval, he called my attention to the caption under the picture and said, “What you wrote there is correct but who is going to understand it? Why did you even use it?”
 Providing a technical explanation that the reader may not understand shows that we really did our research and if we say it’s good, it must be good. It builds confidence in the buyer that he or she is indeed dealing with an expert. Incidentally, the watch was one of our best-selling products.
 Another example of a technical explanation appeared in the outline of a seminar. Jimmy Calano of CareerTrack came up to me after I explained the reasons for a technical explanation and said, “Joe, do you realize that the outline of one of my seminars is, in fact, a technical explanation? By using technical terms that not too many people understand until they come to the seminar, they sense that we know what we are talking about.”
 Yet another example is an ad written by Frank Schultz after attending my seminar. His product was grapefruit and he was explaining how he graded them:
 Even after picking there are other careful inspections each fruit must pass before I’ll accept it. I size the fruit. And I grade it for beauty. Sometimes the fruit will be wind scarred. I won’t accept it. Or sometimes it will have a bulge on the stem that we call “sheep nose.” I

-----

##### won’t accept it. You can see I really mean it when I say I accept only perfect Royal Ruby Reds. In many of my ads, catalogs, direct mailings and infomercials I convey thorough knowledge not only of what I am selling but of the entire universe of products available. I convey the thought process I went through in picking the product I chose and why it is better than anything similar at a particular price point. And the consumer appreciates the effort I took, feels more confident in the purchase and consequently is motivated to reach into his or her pocket and exchange hard-earned money for my product or service.
 8. Anticipate Objections: This is a very important element to consider when writing copy. If you feel that your prospect might raise some objection when you are describing a product, then raise the objection yourself. Remember, you’re not in front of the consumer and you have to sense what the next question might be. If you sense that there might be an objection and you ignore it, it’s like ignoring that consumer. You won’t get away with it. The consumer is too sharp and will not buy. A good example of anticipating objections is in that ad we saw earlier in Chapter 16 for that expensive electronic pinball game from Bally Manufacturing. The average consumer would raise the question about service. We resolved it in our ad.
 Another example of raising an objection is in my ad offering a thermostat for the home. If you remember from Chapter 8, I looked at the product and saw that it was really ugly. It didn’t have a good design at all. In fact, it would turn me off if I were a consumer. So I raised the objection at the very beginning of the ad, calling it the worst-looking product I’d ever seen. I later justified the product by calling attention to its spectacular features, but only after I had raised the design objection myself.
 Often products that require installation concern consumers. It is then that you have to raise the question about installation yourself and not hide from the facts.
 9. Resolve Objections: Just as you have to recognize objections, it is your opportunity and duty to resolve the objections, too. You must be honest and provide alternative solutions or dispel the objections completely. With the pinball game, we talked about the modular circuit boards that you simply snap out and exchange if service is required.

-----

##### More on this later in copy element 14, “Service.” In 2006 Gillette introduced its new five-bladed vibrating Fusion razor, which uses a small AAA battery located in the handle of the razor. A consumer might be wondering, “How long will the battery last?” But Gillette’s excellent approach was to both raise the question and answer it with the statement, “For best performance, change the battery every six months.” 10. Gender: Who is the consumer? Male, female or both genders? Are they female golf players, lady pilots or professional women? Make sure there are no sexual or sexist comments that would offend any group, and know your target audience so that you can communicate in their terms. I once ran an ad for gold chains in my catalog. It was in the form of a story about a salesman named Bob Ross who tried to convince me to sell gold chains. I resisted until he showed me a picture of his cousin who could model the chains in the ad. I quickly accepted the product after seeing a picture of Bob’s cousin. The ad copy was considered by many to be one of my most creative approaches to selling a product. The chains had nothing to do with the core products we had been selling—electronic gadgets. However, I did get a few letters as a result. A woman in Egg Harbor City, New Jersey, wrote:
 Dear Sir: Your friend, Mr. Bob Ross, may regard himself as a successful salesman, but unfortunately he comes across in your ad as a consummate asshole. The letter then went on to point out the achievements of women in many technical fields, the military, air traffic control, sports and leisure, racing and several other professions in which women now play a very active role. She finally concluded:
 Perhaps a long, hard look at the person or department responsible for the ad on page 37 is in order. Apparently he has to “come a long way, baby” to catch up to the Twentieth Century. Cordially wishing you immediate bankruptcy, I remain, And with that she signed her name. It was a two-page single-spaced letter that included a copy of our mailing label. Was I really insensitive to women? Did I demean them in my ad copy? I’ve reproduced the ad in Chapter 33 and it is called “Gold Space Chains.” See if you agree.
 It is also important that you recognize the differences between men and women in terms of what is important to them. Women are generally into

-----

##### color, fashion, family, home and relationships. Men are more likely into sports, military combat, machines, earning money and supporting their family. Sure, their roles overlap tremendously today. Women are assuming the roles that men once had exclusively and men are doing things today that years earlier would have been considered feminine. Being aware of the differences (and sometimes the lack of differences) is the most important point here. And this awareness can help you harmonize with your target audience by understanding how to communicate with them and knowing what might offend them.
 11. Clarity: Your copy should be clear, simple, short and to the point. Avoid big words that confuse those who don’t know them and which often establish the writer as a pompous snob—unless, of course, you’re trying to appeal to pompous snobs. Keep it simple. The clearer the copy and the more concise, the easier it will be for people to read and get on the slippery slide and stay there. The only exception to this rule is when you give a technical explanation, as described earlier in copy element 7 in this chapter. 12. Clichés: Avoid the obvious ones: “Here’s the product the world has been waiting for,” or “It’s too good to be true.” If you feel inclined to use a cliché, don’t. Clichés seem to be used when you have nothing really significant or good to say and must fill up space. How do you know if you are writing a cliché? If it sounds like you’re writing typical advertising copy some agency may have written 20 years ago, that’s one clue. Have I used them? You bet. My first several ads were replete with them. Back when I wrote them, I didn’t know any better.
 For example, in my 1972 ad for a desktop calculator, I stated, “It’s the breakthrough the world has been waiting for!” Bad, isn’t it? I wrote it then but would never write anything as trite today. The lead sentence for the first pocket calculator I introduced in the United States in 1971 read, “It’s the most exciting new breakthrough in electronics since the transistor radio!” Ironically, at the time it may have actually been more truth than cliché.
 13. Rhythm: Just as a song has a rhythm, so does copy. Humor writers know this well. If you can write good humor, you’ve already got the rhythm thing down pat. In fact, the most difficult copy to write is humor. Why humor? Because you have to know how to build up to a punch line

-----

##### and then deliver it. You have to know how not to be too obvious in your delivery and you’ve got to understand the art of timing. So what does this rhythm sound or feel like in advertising copy? It has no distinct pattern: a short sentence, then a long sentence followed by a medium sentence followed by a short sentence and then another short sentence and then one really long sentence. Got it? In short, a mixture of sentence lengths that, when read together, gives a sense of variety and rhythm.
 Think about how copy would sound if all the sentences were very short or very long or all had a distinct predictable pattern. Pretty boring. And that’s the point of copy rhythm. Vary your sentences; vary their length to give your copy a rhythm.
 Another rhythm technique is the use of what is called a “triad.” Very often when I list examples or attributes of something, I use just three of them. For example, take the sentence, “I went shopping for a hammer, a screwdriver and a pair of pliers.” In copy you list three items in a series with the last item preceded by the word and, and you create a nice rhythm within that sentence. In fact, when you read some of the ads in Section Three of this book, you will see how many of them have triads throughout.
 14. Service: If you are selling an expensive product or one that is not easily returned for service, you must address the question of service and convey the ease of that service to the consumer. Often the mention of a brand name manufacturer is all that is needed to establish ease of service. But if there is a remote possibility that the consumer would still ask about service, then you must address this issue in your ad. In selling our Bally pinball game by mail, we knew that a buyer might have concerns about the matter of service. What if the pinball game broke and required repair? It was large and expensive and the inconvenience of a broken game would be in the back of our customers’ minds. We addressed that in the ad. The following is the subheading and paragraph we used to alleviate any customer concerns:

####

-----

# A FRANK DISCUSSION OF
 SERVICE

##### Fireball is a solid-state computer with its electronics condensed on integrated circuits—all hermetically sealed and all pre-tested for a lifetime of service. Fireball is also self-diagnostic. Let us say something goes wrong with the system. Simply press the test button on the back panel of your machine and the exact problem is displayed on your scoreboard in digits. Check the instruction booklet and simply remove the designated plug-in circuit board, light bulb or part and send it to the service department closest to you for a brand new replacement. Even your TV or stereo isn’t that easy to repair. A full paragraph was used to cover the issue of service. And we sold thousands of pinball machines to people who ordinarily might not have purchased a unit because of their concern about service.
 Another good example of how important service is to help sell a product took place during the height of the digital watch boom in the mid-1970s. The industry was expanding very rapidly but there were problems with the reliability of these space-age timepieces. Unlike mechanical watches, these new electronic timepieces had batteries, used sophisticated chips and circuitry and had a high defective rate.
 I recognized this as a problem that had to be addressed in our copy. And since I look at problems as opportunities, I wondered, “Where is the opportunity in this serious and rapidly growing problem?” I then came up with the following copy to establish the quality of the product we were offering and our commitment to back it.
 The Sensor 770 has an unprecedented five-year parts and labor unconditional warranty. Each watch goes through weeks of aging, testing and quality control before assembly and final inspection. Service should never be required, but if it should anytime during the five-year warranty period, we will pick up your Sensor at your door and send you a loaner watch while yours is being repaired—all at our expense.

-----