##### Then later in a summary of the offer, we again played up the part on service.
 We have selected the Sensor as the most advanced American-made, solid-state timepiece ever produced. And we put our company and its full resources behind that selection. JS&A will unconditionally guarantee the Sensor—even the battery—for five years. We’ll even send you a loaner watch to use while your watch is being repaired should it ever require repair. We alleviated any concern about service in the copy of the ad. If the issue of service was raised in the minds of our prospects, it was now resolved. By showing such a strong commitment to service, we had overcome a major objection that we realized, in advance, could be a problem, and turned it into an opportunity.
 Indeed when a customer’s watch did not work, the customer would call us on our toll-free number and we would immediately send out a package containing a UPS call tag that allowed UPS to pick up the defective watch free of charge, a loaner watch and a postage-free envelope for the consumer to return the loaner after receiving the repaired watch.
 This gave our company the opportunity to prove to our customers how consumer-oriented we were. Our customers were literally amazed at the way we followed up with our service program. And after they received their repaired watch, they even got a call from us to make sure everything was okay.
 But that’s not the point of this example. If service is a consideration in the subconscious mind of the consumer and you address it up front, you will melt any resistance to buying your product. The Sensor watch was one of our best-selling watches and the mailing list of watch customers became one of our strongest mailing lists for future offers.
 Service in the selling process has been a critical factor in the success of a personal friend, Joe Girard, who is in The Guinness Book of World Records for having sold more cars in a single year than anybody in history. Joe’s books on salesmanship are worth reading for their many insights, but the one factor that made Joe such an effective salesman (aside from the fact that he was a very personable guy) was the way he handled service. His customers’ service problems became his. And each time he sold a car, Joe became that buyer’s personal service representative. And Joe performed.

-----

##### Then when buyers returned for another car, they wanted to buy only from Joe. It wasn’t price that made Joe’s success, although that was important; it was his attitude toward service.
 15. Physical Facts: In copy you must mention all the physical facts about a product or you risk reducing your response. I’m talking about weight, dimensions, size, limits, speed, and the like. Sometimes you might think that a certain dimension isn’t really important or the weight may not be necessary. But it’s not true. Give readers any excuse not to buy and they won’t buy. I remember running ads for products and then personally taking the orders on our toll-free lines. I did this because it was on the phone lines that I got many of my insights into the buying process. Here were my customers, motivated enough to reach into their pockets and pull out their hard-earned money for a product they trusted me to sell them. What a wonderful opportunity to peek into this process and hear the really subliminal reactions people made when they responded.
 It was during my time on the phone lines that I learned that if you don’t give all the facts, it gives your customer the excuse not to order. It may be a weight or dimension that you thought was irrelevant, but if you don’t mention it, people will call and ask for it. And how many more customers didn’t bother to call and check on it? Of course, they didn’t order, either.
 I remember an ad for a scale pictured on the floor. I didn’t give the actual weight of the scale itself. “Who would care?” I thought. But my prospects did care and frequently asked. We eventually included the weight of the scale in the ad. I remember showing an object that was being held in my hand. I gave the exact dimensions but failed to give the weight because the weight was not really relevant. I got a lot of calls from people wanting to know the weight before deciding whether to buy.
 The point: List the physical dimensions even in cases where you think they are not that important.
 16. Trial Period: With mail order items, you must offer a trial period for any product that the consumer cannot touch or feel at the time of purchase. The only time you can make an exception to this rule is when the value is so strong and the product so familiar that the consumer is willing to take the risk. If I were selling a box of 24 rolls of toilet paper at

-----

##### a bargain price delivered to your home and it was a brand that you already used, then you wouldn’t need a trial period. Make sure your trial period is at least one month, or even better, two months. Tests have proven that the longer the trial period, the less chance the product will be returned and the more confidence the consumer will have in dealing with you and purchasing the item.
 Let’s say you receive a product that has a one-week trial period. You’ve got one week to make up your mind. You feel the pressure, so you examine the product and try to make the decision as quickly as possible. If you are unsure when the week is almost up, what do you do? You say, “I’m not sure, so I’m not going to take the chance,” and you return it.
 But let’s say you have two months to make up your mind. No pressure there, right? You even have a pretty good feeling about the company offering the product. The company must be confident that you’re going to like the product because it is giving you a two-month trial period.
 So you put the product aside. You use it freely, not worried about having to make a decision, and then before you know it the two months are up and you’ve not even thought about returning it. Just knowing you could have returned it was enough to make you feel comfortable holding on to the purchase.
 17. Price Comparison: Whenever possible, offering a price comparison to another product establishes value in the mind of the purchaser. This points out one of the really important considerations that motivate consumers to buy—namely that they are getting real value. An example of a price comparison was my ad for the Sensor watch. I stated:
 The $275 Pulsar uses the LED technology which requires pressing a button each time you want to review the time. Even the $500 solar- powered Synchronar watch, in our opinion, can’t compare with the Sensor and its 5-year warranty. And no solid-state watch can compare to Sensor’s quality, accuracy, ruggedness and exceptional value. If you are selling an expensive item or something that is a good value when compared to another product, you should always consider a price comparison as a means of establishing the value of your product. If your product is the most expensive product being offered, then you want to

-----

##### suggest that it has more or better features. If your product is less expensive, then you want to focus on better value and use a price comparison.
 But there’s a word of caution. Your comparison must be totally accurate and be 100 percent fair or you could be sued by the company whose product you are comparing.
 18. Testimonials: A testimonial is a good way to add credibility if it is from a very credible person or organization. This approach can be used not only in the copy but in the headline or photo. See if your ad copy could use a celebrity for a testimonial, but make sure the testimonial makes sense for the product. When I was selling a space-age Midex security system, it made sense to ask Wally Schirra, the famous astronaut, to endorse my product. He did, and the product sold very well. If I were selling basketball shoes, Michael Jordan would be a natural.
 Make sure that the celebrity matches with the product and adds credibility. The use of a celebrity who doesn’t make sense for your product or doesn’t add credibility could backfire, have the wrong effect and kill sales if the offer is not believable.
 You can also use what I call a “reverse testimonial.” That is where you don’t use a spokesperson but you refer to your competitor’s. For example, when I was selling the Olympus micro recorder, I stated the following:
 Headline: Endorsement Battle Subheadline: A famous golf star endorses the Lanier. Our unit is endorsed by our president. You’ll save $100 as a result. Copy: Judge for yourself. That new Olympus micro recorder shown above sells for $150. Its closest competition is a $250 recorder called the Lanier endorsed by a famous golf star.

####

-----

# FANCY ENDORSEMENT

##### The famous golf star is a pilot who personally flies his own Citation jet. The Olympus recorder is endorsed by JS&A’s president who pilots a more cost-efficient single engine Beechcraft Bonanza. The golf star does not endorse the Lanier unit for free. After all, a good portion of his income is derived from endorsing products. Our president, on the other hand, does not get paid for endorsing products—just for selling them. And his Bonanza is not as expensive to fly as the golf star’s Citation. In fact, our president also drives a Volkswagen Rabbit. I then continued to show how inefficiently the Lanier was sold (through a direct selling organization) and how efficiently the Olympus was sold (via direct marketing and through JS&A). The conclusion: savings of $100 for an even better product—all because we didn’t have our product endorsed by an expensive spokesperson.
 Another form of testimonial is from the man on the street—used primarily on TV. I’ve used them extensively in my BluBlocker infomercials. And finally, another one could come from those people who use your product and send you an unsolicited testimonial. Whatever testimonial you do use, make sure it is authentic and honest. The public will see right through a lie and the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) won’t be far behind.
 19. Price: Another important copy point to consider is the price. Should the price be obvious? Should it be set in large type? Small? These are important considerations and must be examined. If you’re selling a product or service at a very good price, then set the price in larger type. After all, you want people to see that benefit very clearly. If the product is expensive and it’s not the price that will sell it, you want to underplay it. Don’t hide it; just underplay it.
 As I write my ad I have always anticipated the questions my prospects will ask. There is one exception. I never know when they are going to wonder about the price of the product. I have always felt that the point at which your reader will want to find out about the price could happen anytime during the reading process. It could happen before they read the ad.

-----

##### It could happen halfway through or it could happen near the end. You must, as an effective copywriter, answer the question when it is being raised by the reader.
 By putting the price in a logical position in the copy—whether it be in the coupon, which is the ideal place, or in the copy highlighted with a bold typeface—you are answering the question that the reader asks without knowing when the reader is ready to ask the question. The reader simply scans the ad and if the price is in bold or in the coupon, the price will pop out and answer the question.
 20. Offer Summary: It’s a really good idea to summarize what you are offering the consumer somewhere near the end of your ad. “So here’s my offer. Order two pots with Teflon coating and you’ll receive the two pots plus our handy cookbook and video for the price of only $19.95.” You’ll be surprised at how many ads miss this important point. 21. Avoid Saying Too Much: This is probably the biggest mistake my students make. They say too much. There are really two issues here. The first issue is one of editing. It is normal to say as much as you can about a subject and then refine the copy to a point where it flows smoothly. This usually means editing and reducing the copy length until it has rhythm and it flows. This could take time and involves a few steps. First, say to yourself as you go through the editing process, “Is there a simpler way of saying this?” Very often you can cut your copy down 50 to even 80 percent and still say the same thing. It’s the difference between a salesperson who talks too much and one who is to the point and succinct. Wouldn’t you rather be sold by the one who is to the point?
 There is another issue involved with not saying too much, and later in this book in the “Mental Enagement” section of Chapter 19 I explain how not saying too much will actually enhance and even stimulate the selling process. Chapter 17 on editing also has ideas that will help you reduce your copy.
 22. Ease of Ordering: Make it easy to order. Use a toll-free number, a coupon, a tear-off reply card or any vehicle that is easy to understand and use. My recommendation: Use a coupon with dotted lines. In tests, it usually generates more response because the dotted lines clearly convey at a glance that you can order the product from the ad.

-----

##### 23. Ask for the Order: Always ask for the order near the end of your ad. This is often forgotten by many copywriters. At the end of an ad, I state the following or something similar: “I urge you to buy this at no obligation, today.” Have you ever met a salesperson who has already sold you and you are waiting for the salesperson to ask you for the order but he or she never does? It’s happened to me. And it is one of the problems with a lot of inexperienced salespeople. You’ve got to ask for the order, and if you’re doing it right, it should be at the very end of the ad where you’ve finished selling your prospect, you’ve summarized the offer and your prospect is ready to buy. These 23 copy elements are points you want to consider when you are writing copy. Use this chapter as a checklist when you get started. Consider all of these points when you write an ad. Can some of them be eliminated? Possibly. But simply by using them as a checklist, you might discover a few deficiencies in your ad copy that can be corrected with my suggestions and might result in enhancing your response.
 One of the other benefits of the list is to give you an insight into the relative importance of the various copy elements. Some, like the paragraph headings, have little purpose other than to make the copy less imposing. Others, like resolving objections, can make a dramatic difference in the credibility of your copy.
 Use the convenient copy elements checklist located in Appendix C in the back of this book and make a copy to keep right next to your computer or desk when you are writing an ad.
 But the really interesting part of my checklist is in the next chapter where you’ll learn about the psychological triggers that need to be considered when you write an ad. You first learned about the 10 graphic elements and their purpose (to get you to read the first sentence of the copy) in Chapter 4. You have just learned 23 copy concepts and how they are to be used. Now learn the 31 psychological triggers—the underlying motivational messages that good direct response copy should convey, often in subtle but very effective ways. When I was teaching my seminar course, this was the part my students enjoyed the most. So read on.

####

-----

# Chapter 19

 The Psychological Triggers

##### The 31 psychological triggers are probably going to be the most interesting of the 64 points you want to consider when writing a direct response print ad or any kind of selling message.
 The first part of the 64-point checklist involves the 10 graphic elements of an ad—those elements designed to get you to read the first sentence. The previous chapter covered 23 points to consider when writing the actual copy. But now get ready for the psychology that should be considered when writing your advertising message—concepts that took me years of failure, experience and gradual insight to understand and implement.
 You may understand and relate to some of these concepts right away. Some you may not fully understand without experiencing them yourself. And finally, some will require a fairly detailed explanation.
 If you’ve found this book informative so far, you will find this chapter fascinating. So let’s start.

####

-----

# 1. Feeling of Involvement or
 Ownership