In his book, Boomer Selling: Helping the Wealthiest Generation in History Own Premium Products and Services, Steve Howard writes, “We’ve started realizing that if we don’t spend the money we’ve got locked up in home equity, saving accounts, and investments pretty soon, the government will be glad to spend it for us. Once we face the fact that we have more days behind us than ahead of us, our lives and lifestyles move into a new phase. Old wants are replaced with new wants. We want to take that cruise or build that cabin we’ve always dreamed of. We want to buy products that make our life better.” In other words, when previous 60+ groups were shutting down spending, this group and those now aging into it are spending on themselves, their homes, their lifestyles, as well as their families.
 In his book, UN-Retirement: How Baby Boomers Are Changing The Way We Think About Work, Community and the Good Life, Chris Farrell says that the traditional idea of retirement was actually a “short-lived anomaly.” He notes that, “The boomer generation, poised to live longer in better health than any before, is discovering unretirement—extending their work lives with new careers and entrepreneurial ventures.” CNBC reports


-----

##### that, “Boomers are uniquely focused on having personally and professionally productive retirements. Boomers are even more likely than other generations to take risks by investing some or all of their retirement funds into starting businesses or they are more willing to spend their savings on expensive retirement activities. Boomers are actually twice as likely to launch new businesses as Gen X’ers or Millennials, and marketers of franchises, business opportunities, business training, and coaching and related services should take note.” In my world of trainers, coaches, and support networks for small-business owners in over 150 different niches as well as the membership at large of No B.S. Inner Circle, the trends are for the older owners (50 to 70) to stay in charge longer than they had imagined or intended, and more surprisingly, to be ambitious and aggressive about growth and expansion. Our audiences are dominated by gray hair.
 I recently had a conversation about this with a half dozen clients and coaching group members, all, like me, 60+ and absent any need to earn money. The consensus was: We could all quit tomorrow, but none of us know how. I have twice failed at retirement before. One of the effects of this “staying in the game longer,” after wealth is created and secure, is more people with more discretionary spending power. With zero need to add to their “nest egg,” they can spend all the current income without guilt or anxiety about doing so. Rolls-Royce recently rolled out a $350,000.00 SUV, and it’s not for Millennials or Gen X’ers!
 In the sport/business I’m active in—harness racing—there are young people of Gen X and Millennial ages, but it skews Boomer and Senior, and I am often driving in a race with as many 60- and even 70-year-old drivers as 30- and 40-year-olds. The younger ones do have a physicality advantage, but wisdom of age and treachery can often triumph. There’s a saying in racing: No man contemplates retirement or welcomes death with a promising 2-year-old colt in the barn. The age of successful competition in all pro sports is rising. Tom Brady and Drew Brees are performing as NFL quarterbacks well past the age that “should” precipitate decline. There are more head and assistant coaches age 60+ than there are 40 and below in the NFL, with that percentage rising as more choose to hang around or retire and then unretire.
 Jay Leno and David Letterman both retired from TV, both swearing they were done, both with time-consuming and expensive hobbies to turn all


-----

##### their attention to. But both are back to work. Leno with his own show tied to his hobby on CNBC, a recurring role in Tim Allen’s sitcom on FOX, plus still appearing in Vegas and at corporate events doing stand-up. Letterman less expansively, but putting together and hosting an interview show on Netflix.
 All this represents the new trend-wave of UNretirement. This suggests marketing to 60- and 70-year-olds as if they were 40 to 50.

 Where Are They Going? While Florida and Arizona remain immensely popular with those in their 60s, the trend is toward split-time residences: owning two or even three homes or condos in different places and dividing time between them, not necessarily in strict seasonal rotation. Yesterday’s snowbird migrating south or west for the winter is being replaced by a less migratory, more flexible splitter, who may be at his Michigan home in a university town for much of the winter, for skiing, for holiday activities with family; at his Las Vegas high-rise condo for New Year’s and a number of times during the year; and at his Florida home the majority of the time, making it the primary residence, but barely. Boomers are mobile.
 This has all sorts of marketplace effects. For example, the reverse mortgage began as a product of interest only to seniors typically 70 and up of modest means or even absent assets other than their home, in need of income, but is now welcomed by people at the minimum age allowed, 62, as a different means of extracting money from their primary residence without going into debt in order to buy their new second home, their gigantic RV (recreational vehicle), or their luxury time-share membership. Consequently, many mortgage brokers across the country have begun successfully micro-targeting “young seniors,” that is, Boomers with known interest in second or vacation homes, RVs, and so on, and probably interest in retaining their primary, current homes for life. I foresee a whole new kind of time-share linking a cluster of homes and condos in a Midwest hometown with a cluster of homes and condos in Florida, each resident having x number of weeks in each location, and y number of weeks in


-----

##### neither, when on cruises and other vacations—all paid via one ownership fee and monthly service fee, all provided by one company.
 Boomers are also making up an increasing percentage of the estimated four million and climbing “commuter couples,” who, by choice, for business, career, or family reasons, live apart a significant percentage of time and commute to be together. Interestingly, the higher you go in affluence, the more you find this occurring.

 What Do They Want? What Will They Buy? As you’ll see as we progress, it is dangerous and foolhardy to do what I’m about to do—generalize—yet I do believe there are overriding themes that offer us big keys to success with Boomers. To quote Ken Gronbach, author of Common Census: Counterintuitive Guide to Generational Marketing:

 They know what they want. They’ve been buying the same oil for their cars for years and they wear tan pants … At this point in their lives they want only three things:

 1. Life made easy. 2. Time saved. 3. Not to be ripped off.

 I’m not sure about the undying loyalty to a brand of oil or color of trousers—although, personally, I’ve happily gone from 30 to 40 different kinds, colors, and fabrics of pants to only two constituting 90% of my wardrobe (tan Khakis and blue jeans)—but I definitely buy his list of three chief wants. If you examine most ads aimed at Boomers, though, you won’t find these basic appeals straightforwardly addressed. Here’s how I’ll make your life easy. Here’s how I’ll save you time. Here are solid proof and guarantees. And if you’d like a good copywriting checklist for a 4-by-6 card, there it is.
 It’s also worth noting that affluent Boomers already own a lot of stuff. Their needs are fewer and get increasingly fewer with passing years, thus they are less interested in or seduced by things. Many of us now have the experience of paging through a favorite catalog or visiting a mall, able to buy just about anything we might want without second thought but finding


-----

##### nothing to buy. Consequently, Boomers are service consumers more than product buyers. We want nothing as a thing; we want a thing that gives us time, convenience, freedom, or ease.
 The third item on Gronbach’s list is too often forgotten or misunderstood when selling to Boomers. They have had more than enough life experience to have been disappointed or felt ripped off by a number of purchases and marketers. And they are not eager to repeat the experience. Boomers still think in terms of “classic credibility” while younger consumers do not; for example, brand names matter more, credible and relevant celebrity endorsements matter, years in business, professional affiliations, access to live humans for resolving problems all matter more to Boomers than to younger buyers (and more to seniors than to Boomers). You need to increase the reassurance for each year of your customer’s age.
 Beyond Gronbach’s list, I would make number four that they want what is for them—but not if pandered to or made to feel old by the specialization or customization. Affluent Boomers are, frankly, elitists. To quote somebody I can’t name, “If you can’t have things everybody else can’t, what the hell’s the point of being rich?” Further, affluent Boomers, especially affluent leading-edge and aging Boomers, know (but prefer not to enunciate) that they have special needs and want them accommodated without a lot of fanfare.

 One of the Toughest Challenges for Marketers (The Death of Age Based Advertising) Age used to be a straight line, a continuum from birth to death, with benchmarks that were extremely predictive of behavior and therefore consumer spending. Many marketers still act as if this were true. People used to progress from college or military to office to family life to empty nest, retirement, and the golf course on a predictable schedule. These days, the schedule’s been tossed out the window. Some 50- and 60-year-olds are starting second or third families, so a 55-year-old couple is in the market for a larger home (not a smaller one) close to a good school (not a golf course) and is a prospect for a Disney® Vacation Club time-share (not a condo in a retirement community). Instead of ending careers at 60 or 65, Boomers are extending careers, starting new ones, and buying or starting businesses. We


-----

##### Boomers have made a helluva mess out of age-benchmark-based advertising, marketing, list segmentation, and product and service offers.
 This mess we’re making requires an entirely new way of thinking about demographics, a far greater reliance on psychographics, and a much more serious commitment to such things as lead-generation advertising so Boomers self-select; precise list segmentation and message-to-segment matching; sophisticated database management with the best possible tools; and smart use of response lists rather than compiled lists. It also requires literal reinvention of businesses to meet the desires of the segment(s) they choose—with recognition that hardly any business can be all things to all Boomers. Frankly most businesses—large or small, national or local— WILL FAIL MISERABLY at capitalizing on these opportunities. The fresh and creative thinking, the agility in adapting, the financial and other commitments required will be beyond their owners’ or leaders’ ability or willingness to provide. As a result, I believe a number of big-name companies will be bankrupt and gone ten years from today, literally driven extinct by Boomers’ refusal to patronize them. And most small-business owners will feel it is all beyond them.
 The tiny number of business owners willing to dig in and figure all this out and adapt accordingly may find the next 6 to 12 years of boomer boom to be the greatest wealth-creating time of their lives.
 None of this means FREELY IGNORING the historic patterns of spending tied to passages from 30 to 40, 40 to 50, 50 to 60, etc. My friend, Harry Dent Jr., is uncanny at his ability to predict the booms, stalls, and busts in various product, service, and business categories based on his study of the rising or declining populations within age groupings and the historical precedents for their present and future spending. Every marketer should pay attention to Dent. You can start, free, at www.DentResearch.com. However, you can’t be dogmatic about this, either. You have to be able to spot the disruptive factors that differ so significantly from the past that they will prevent history from repeating itself perfectly or precisely. You have to recognize substantial, artificial interference with the natural order and pace of things—as an example, the Bernanke-to-Yellen years of super-suppression of interest rates, artificial support for the stock market (building a big bubble), and printing of money.


-----

##### This is the sort of thing that causes deviation from otherwise imminently predictable patterns much like a once-in-100-years drought causes deviation from otherwise predictable crop yields, harvests, and commodity prices.
 Above all else, though, it is the attitude and mindset of the affluent consumer that matters most. If, for example, a barely-mass-affluent consumer loses 20% of their $250,000.00 net worth and his household income also drops by 25%, they are not only emotionally traumatized, their actual ability to spend is compromised, more likely crippled. But if the truly affluent consumer and even more so the ultra-affluent consumer suffers the same percentage cuts, they still have a comfortable or beyond-comfortable cash reserve and asset base, and they still have far more income than they need for necessities. For the ordinary consumer, the normal, customary, by- age attitudes can’t govern spending when such reversals occur. For the affluent and ultra-affluent consumer, the normal, customary, by-age attitudes can still rule.

 A Look at the Attitudes Governing Boomers’ Spending
 Boomers’ Attitudes toward Aging The advertising insider term for the earliest Boomers is abbies: aging baby Boomers. But these Boomers would decry the term. To say that these Boomers expect to stay young isn’t just a vague idea—it’s verifiable through hard data from quality statistical research. Yankelovich Partners, one of America’s respected research groups, found early Boomers surveyed placed “old age” as starting three years after average life expectancy (82.3 years). Irrational as it may be, Boomers do not feel bound by facts. They fully expect advances in health care, genomics, and other areas to have them living to or beyond 100. And the big wave of Boomers behind them is even more expectant of long life. This has great significance for marketers. It means, in general, that a large number of those 60-plus are not thinking in terms of slowing down, aging gracefully, or retiring (as retirement has been known in the past) but instead are thinking about new options and changes.
 An extensive survey of women ages 50 to 64 by Dove® beauty products found that they do not see themselves as “older women,” and they resist such description. Age is, of course, a more sensitive issue with women than men, and the gender differences do need to be considered throughout


-----

##### marketing to Boomers, essentially adding a female vs. male division to whatever other segmentation is done.

 Boomers’ Attitudes toward Health Boomers now expect to be cured of all sorts of things our parents or grandparents accepted as incurable—including breast cancer and other cancers, heart disease and heart attacks, and other serious ailments. There is an optimistic faith in medical research producing more and better cures for all manner of disease that is wholly unwarranted by reality; there actually hasn’t been a new, complete cure for anything since polio. However, Boomers still believe the cure for what ails them is just around the corner and will arrive in time to save them. This makes a segment uninterested in self-help, self-disciplines, and so on regarding their diseases. Fortunately, there is a sizeable segment who share similar hope for cures but are also extraordinarily proactive in attempting to influence their own health with alternative means; thus the boomer boom is fueling the dramatic sales growth in nutritional and dietary supplements, herbal supplements, treatments available only at foreign clinics, organic and bio-engineered healthy foods, and so forth. On top of that, and seemingly in contradiction to it, the pharmaceutical industry is having a field day rolling out new prescription drugs for every conceivable (and newly conceived) ailment, welcomed by Boomers. Viagra® may be the most age-attitude altering of all pharmaceuticals of our time—it radically changed Boomers’ specific beliefs about sex lives and aging, but, more broadly, it also changed attitudes about fixing all normal aging issues with drugs. It removed sigma; it created new expectations. In short, real medicine, alternative medicine, fake medicine, all booming with no end in sight.
 The huge wellness industry is one of the world’s fastest growing, encompassing spas, meditation retreats, wellness tourism, organic foods and grocery stores, integrative medicine, cosmetic surgery, chiropractic, massage therapy, as well as corporate wellness and fitness programs. A lot of services once confined to medical-type practice environments, like massage therapy, teeth straightening (www.SmileDirectClub.com), and laser treatments, have gone retail into stores in malls and shopping centers. Of course, the expansion of websites and online stores having to do with


-----