## It has been about a year since my NO B.S. MARKETING TO THE AFFLUENT book was first published, and it was written, sealed, and delivered to its publisher about 6 months before that. Obviously, much has changed since then. I predicted and allowed for most of it, although the depth and extent of the destruction has surprised even me, and the combined ignorance, stupidity, and arrogance of those now in charge who are worsening the trouble with their every meddling is greater than even I imagined. Still, in re- reading my own book this week, I find most of it perfectly applicable, some of it particularly relevant. Chapter 16, for example, now has double purpose; it talks about selling “little indulgences” to mass affluents who trade up, but is now just as useful in marketing to wounded affluents foregoing major luxuries and more desirous of little ones, as salve for wounds.

 Here is more about the new realities . . . By most accounts, the affluent have done very well: those in the top 10% of incomes have seen their incomes rise 34% after inflation since 1979 (while those in the bottom 10% have seen a paltry 4% increase— although there’s no correlation). It is the gains of the rich that have spawned massive growth in luxury housing, real estate, countless consumer services—from maid and housecleaning services to lawn care to pet-sitting, and invention of new businesses like fractional jet ownership. The spending of the affluent has been and is a considerable economic driver. 1.2-million luxury cars were sold in ‘08, for example; about 15% of total, net U.S. auto sales, but a much higher contribution to profit. This “power spending class” is now reigning itself in, in varying degrees, in different product and service categories—another

-----

## problem for the economy as a whole, and a new advertising, marketing, and sales challenge for those who rely on them. For the economy, luxury-industry unemployment is at 15%+, in retail, in home building, in top-upscale restaurants. For the marketers, creating new value propositions has been key: Ritz-Carlton, Bergdorfs, and their peer companies are all aggressive in “bundling”, packaging and discounting. In Vail, Colorado, luxury ski resort operators report a slump in occupancy over previous years, which they are attacking, with some success, by getting more last-minute customers, lured with overt direct offers, featuring extra free days, free meals, meal plans and discounts.
 Affluent hesitancy to spend at this time revolves around three things: one, actual, diminished capacity or anticipated diminished capacity; two, being more selective and demanding about value for dollars spent i.e., spending decisions less casual; and three, concern about inappropriateness of high-end spending. The General Manager of a dealership selling Bentley, Rolls-Royce, and Lotus says his customers can still afford to indulge but express to him the thought that showing up in a new luxury car when friends or colleagues are losing their jobs or businesses may seem de-classe. To this last point, just throwing your money around or flaunting your spending is “so pre-recession.” Shoppers at high-end boutiques are asking for plain bags or home delivery; a Gucci store reports delivering a $1,200.00 bag wrapped as a gift so no one would know the person bought it for herself. The owner of a New Jersey manufacturing company told a reporter he was unaffected, was proceeding with his annual family vacation to the Bahamas, but “trying to be more covert.” Barbara Lazaroff, Wolfgang Puck’s ex-wife and business partner, says their upscale restaurants are still busy, but customers skip the $300.00 bottles of wine—“they want to seem respectful of the recession.” Making it acceptable to spend is an interesting challenge. It suggests more non-profit and charity tie-ins; tying practical arguments to desires for a purchase, making it more rationally defensible; using the recession and the unusual savings opportunities to forces as good, sensible reason to buy now. Senseless

-----

## extravagant spending is out; but sensible extravagant spending is alive and well.
 At its core, this is all nothing more—or less—than my Message- Market Match. Kraft is hurrying ten new DiGiorgio pizzas to market in recession response, promoted as just like pizza delivered from Pizza Hut, etc., but at half the price . . . and new flavors of Kool-Aid, advertised as “more smiles per gallon,” less costly than soda pop. Right for their market. If selling to the affluent, and selling premiumpriced goods or services, obviously a different message has always been required; now it has to incorporate additional elements that address the above three issues. More complex marketing messages, more care, more thought, better targeting. (Sources: Associated Press wire service article, “The Wealthy Turn Stealthy,” 1-27-09. Sent in by Luxury Member Jan Duke, the Glazer- Kennedy Independent Business Advisor in Chico/Redding, California; and USA TODAY 2-2-09)

 This article is reprinted from The No B.S. Marketing to the Affluent Letter, one of a family of business, marketing, and sales newsletters and other resources published by Glazer-Kennedy Insider’s Circle LLC. For information about these publications, a free trial offer, free introductory webinars, and other resources, visit www.FreeGiftFrom.com.sales.

-----