## The Reinvention of the

 Barbershop with Wealth Attraction

#### O n one level, could there be a more ordinary, runof-the-mill, mundane, and commoditized business than men’s haircuts? And how on earth could such a business be made a beacon of creativity magnetic to money?
 Briefly in this book I alluded to the enormity of the opportunity in creating and delivering exceptional experience-based products and services to the mass-affluent and affluent markets. In another book in this series, No B.S. Marketing to the Affluent, I deal with the subject extensively. It is my contention that the best place to attract wealth is a place where there is wealth. It’s not much harder but it can be much more rewarding to aim your business at the upper echelons than at the bottom. But when you do, the business must be about something more than its core goods and services .
 This is what attracted me to the business that became Kennedy’s All- American Barber Club[®], although my name in its name is mostly coincidental, only a tiny bit ceremonial honor; I am a founding investor as well as marketing strategy advisor, but I have no managerial role,

-----

#### responsibility, or control. The owners claim they were thinking of other Kennedys when choosing the name. In any case, my enthusiasm is entirely based on this as a perfect example of a New Economy Business utilizing a wide range of my wealth attraction principles as well as my marketing strategies. It has and champions a philosophy, strives for emotional connection, is for a particular customer, and is about more than its core deliverable; a shave and a haircut. Its CEO, Chris Hurn, describes how he sees it fit into the Wealth Attraction Magnets you’ve been reading about in this book, on the following pages. Before ceding to him, I’ll make two points of my own about this business concept:
 One of the strategic marketing changes that I’ve been urging on my clients as they move into The New Economy, is called “chore to more.” It means transforming what is, for most customers, a chore, at best bothersome, at worst unpleasant, into something more. More enjoyable, more gratifying, more interesting—or, if none of those seem possible, at least more convenient and efficient. High-end supermarkets have moved in this creative direction, adding good on-site child care facilities, cafés, even day-spas, so the girls can meet at the market, drop off their kids, and make a day of it—and they do. It’s my opinion every business needs to follow their lead. For most guys, getting their hair cut is a boring chore they put off. It is an inconvenient timesuck, it sends them into environments they aren’t comfortable in, and it is utterly uninteresting. Some shops have tried mitigating this by slapping a few flat-screen TV’s up on the wall tuned to sports channels, but this isn’t fooling anybody—it’s like playing a Disney music CD real loud while you clean out the garage or pick up dog poop in the backyard and trying to convince yourself you’re having fun. C’mon. I’m not talking about putting prettier wallpaper over top of a battered, moldy wall; I’m talking about replacing the old with new and different. Kennedy’s is definitely a “chore-to-more” business.
 The other point has to do with the business from the ownership standpoint. Many, many successful small-business owners, professionals in private practice like doctors, dentists, accountants, financial advisors, traveling sales professionals, and others can benefit enormously from owning a second business. While their first business or career takes care of their current financial needs and desires, pays off the mortgage, and sends the kids to college, the second business can pour all its take-home profits into wealth-building and retirement funds. This is the only practical way for

-----

#### many to have the option of retiring early, and to retire rich. But most businesses, franchised or not, are too complicated, too costly, and too time- demanding to meet this need. The leadership team at Kennedy’s deliberately designed a small footprint, easy to manage and absentee manage, high-profit, stable income business with this unique type of franchise owner in mind. Consequently, almost all franchisees to date have other, successful businesses or careers and are developing their Kennedy’s Barber Clubs as second businesses. This has Kennedy’s aimed at a very different potential franchisee candidate than 95% of all other franchisors. This is Wealth Magnet 17—Seeing What Isn’t There—deployed in a very practical way.
 To attract wealth in The New Economy, I think you have to be different than others, do things differently than others, and pursue different people than the majority of those categorized as your competitors are pursuing. The business to which you’ll be introduced in this chapter embodies all three of these maneuvers. I also urge you to visit KennedysBarberClub.com for a more indepth look.

## Shave and a Haircut, Not Two Bits

 By Chris Hurn
#### My name is Chris Hurn. I’m in Dan’s Platinum Mastermind Group and am the Independent Business Advisor (Chapter Director for Glazer-Kennedy Insider’s Circle[™] ) in Orlando, Florida. I’m also a bit of a serial entrepreneur and investor. Among the five businesses I run are an Inc . 500- honored commercial finance company (Mercantile Capital Corporation), a strategic marketing consulting and business coaching firm (Hurn, Harter and Worrall), and my latest, a national franchise. This franchise, where I’m both the Franchisor and a Franchisee, is called Kennedy’s All-American Barber Club[®] (and no, the name was not chosen in relation to Dan ).

-----

#### Kennedy’s is a mass-affluent-targeted, membership-based, classic barbershop concept that stands in contrast to everything else in this space. As of this writing, there are six Clubs open and another 51 already sold and to be developed over the next five years. This is in only the first year. Even in the “strained” economic times in which we started out, we are rapidly building-out this unique concept nationally, with individual unit and master territory franchisees. More importantly, the Clubs we have opened are all showing tremendous growth, and that’s a testament to our business model, the selection of our ideal clients, and our continued execution of our systems.
 Dan asked me to relate some of the Wealth Magnets in this book to Kennedy’s, as an example of how a very purposefully created business utilizes the principles herein. While we employ all of the Wealth Magnets to varying degrees, some in particular stand out.

### Wealth Magnet 1: No Guilt

#### Life is to be lived. Abundance is all around us. And we should partake in most of the pleasures of this world. Those are key beliefs we hold at Kennedy’s. Yes, our barbershop franchise has beliefs because we’re not really in the barbershop business; we’re in the “movement” business ... but more on that later.
 Kennedy’s is built on the premise that the modern man could use a little pampering, that it’s OK for him to indulge a bit. Now, this isn’t an idea with which many men are overly comfortable (although the ranks are growing by the hour ), nor are most typically seeking this, at least consciously, for whatever reasons. In my experience, men are often dragged to a spa with their significant other, but once there, they tend to enjoy it—quite a bit. In fact, men’s spa services and men’s grooming product sales are the fastest areas of growth in their respective niches.
 Philosophically, we believe our clients deserve a little pampering now and again, and we’re here to provide it. Men throughout the ages have gone to their neighborhood barbershops to “clean up” and in so doing, have generally had a pleasant experience. Unfortunately for Modern Man, the unisex movement of the 1970s all but killed off the American barbershop,

-----

#### as we’d come to know it. Kennedy’s represents us bringing back something quite unique and nostalgic, but with a modern twist of new improvements.
 In saying that they “deserve it,” we at Kennedy’s are exhibiting the “No Guilt” Wealth Magnet. I’ve often told potential franchisees that Kennedy’s is in the “small indulgences” business and in the “affordable luxury” realm. Our clients typically work hard—often carrying the proverbial “weight of the world” on their shoulders—and they shouldn’t feel ashamed of becoming well groomed and receiving a little exceptional pampering in the process. In fact, it used to be a rite of passage—getting a fresh haircut and a relaxing shave—where men would go celebrate their wins and/or get ready to tackle life. Knights, officers, cowboys, outlaws, statesmen, mobsters, business leaders, sports stars, and celebrities alike would indulge in this practice (there’s a very understandable, yet primitive reason, our clients feel like a king or a kingpin when in our barber chairs ). And we are unapologetic about men deserving this.
 Sure, they could go to just another, ordinary hair-care place, but why would they? Kennedy’s is so much more than just a place to get a haircut and an old-fashioned straight-razor shave (a complimentary beverage— even premium beer!—shoulder massage, shoe-shine, lifestyle magazine, shampoo, and conditioning scalp massage are all standard). That “more” is part of what makes us so special and is one of our core differentiators as a business. But none of our clients should feel guilty because they receive award-winning and luxurious service. I tell our Barbers and Club Managers that it’s our honor and privilege to care for our clients in this way. We could provide less, but why would we? Our clients shouldn’t have to settle for less. Being “All-American” means living Large, fully appreciating life. Anything less, as the old commercials say, would be uncivilized.

### Wealth Magnet 8: Be Somebody

#### We named our franchise “Kennedy’s” because we felt that name represented many good things to many different people—practically all of them being upscale, elite, and enduring. For whatever reasons (this is not a sociologist’s book, so we won’t explore them here ), our culture is very

-----

#### clearly obsessed with celebrities. And, given the chance, most people would love to be one themselves.
 Whatever your politics, it is undeniable that our 35th President, JFK, was our most handsome, most stylish, and as we’ve come to learn over the years, a real “ladies man.” He was our first “celebrity” President and even presided over our own version of “Camelot.” He rubbed elbows with the sports, musical, and movie stars of his era, all while looking completely at ease doing so. I think you’d be hard-pressed to find a modern man who wouldn’t have wanted to trade places with him for a little while (sans the bad back, missile crisis, and assassination ) .
 Thus, we’ve come to describe our ideal client as a “Kennedy.” For us, it’s become a living metaphor. “He’s a Kennedy’s man alright.” “Why don’t you just act like a Kennedy, will ya?” “The ladies all look at him as a real Kennedy’s man.”
 For some of our clients, we provide a brief escape into Walter Mitty-like fantasies. Our concept tends to enable them to become somebody they may not really be, even if just for an hour or so. Feeling like you’re being treated as James Bond would be or like you’re Robert DeNiro playing Al Capone in The Untouchables (when reporters encircled him at his knee while he’s in his barber chair)—these are the images our clients tell us they feel like when they briefly indulge at a Kennedy’s. We allow them to “Be Somebody” they normally aren’t or to help build them up into someone they can be.
 In doing this, the founders of Kennedy’s also demonstrate the “Be Somebody” Wealth Magnet by being the “faces” of the franchise itself. Not only do our pictures and columns appear in every issue of our monthly lifestyle magazine (turning us into mini-celebrities), but we also go to great lengths to live the “Kennedy’s” lifestyle in front of our clients and represent the four primary types of men we attract to Kennedy’s: business owners; corporate executives; retirees and semi-retirees; and aspiring professionals. We put pictures of us (and our Club Members) with prominent celebrities in our publication, interview celebrities and place them on the covers, and we use examples of celebrities and exclusive settings in our storytelling. All of these associations build up Kennedy’s beyond the typical hair care place and into more of a lifestyle movement. WE are “somebodies” and each of our Clients can also “be somebodies” at Kennedy’s. Put another way, we

-----

#### created a place where a man can be a man—and these are very few places like that these days.

### Wealth Magnet 9: Be Somewhere

#### This Wealth Magnet is really at the core of the Kennedy’s concept. Our clients are typically our Members, as we provide four different membership options to belong to our grooming Clubs, but we also take some walk-in customers. Kennedy’s is primarily a place where our clients (Members) belong and that taps into a core psychological need that most men have: to join something; to be a part of something larger than life.
 I should also mention that in creating Kennedy’s, we were trying to bring back the nostalgic notion of the “gentleman.” Somehow over the years, fewer and fewer men describe themselves as or even acting like “gentlemen,” yet this very type of man was what made up the “movers and shakers” who helped make America great. A “true” gentlemen’s club, as I like to call it (not the perfectly spun misnomer of the strip club variety) a place of fraternity, where likeminded men could come together—that’s the type of movement we wanted to create with Kennedy’s. In fact, our monthly Kennedy’s magazine is even called The Ultimate Guidebook for the Successful Gentleman [™] —and we’ve been publishing it almost since Day One. This publication telegraphs exactly whom we’re trying to attract as Kennedy’s men—I call it the “glue” that holds everything together.
 Aside from fraternal organizations, which seem to be dying off, no place else quite like Kennedy’s exists. Sure, Starbucks may be a “third place,” but it doesn’t represent anything special for one gender or the other. The town tavern may be a “third place” for some men, but we didn’t want to promote that particular lifestyle. And while the men’s card room at a local country club is getting closer to our ideal, we created Kennedy’s as an egalitarian place for all men, be they white collar or blue—to experience the type of exceptional grooming we only used to see in old movies. I like to think we’ve “democratized” this otherwise elite experience, and several of our more “blue collar” Members have confided in me that Kennedy’s is where they treat themselves and where they go to belong on a “different level” (their words, not mine). “Being somewhere” is what Kennedy’s means to

-----

#### our Members, and being a Kennedy’s man means being seen tackling life. Nothing less will do .

### Wealth Magnet 10: Do Something

#### The notion of the Kennedy’s man is one who is “in motion.” It’s one who is taking action and trying to make a dent in the world. This is a fundamental part of our philosophy and a recurring theme in our monthly lifestyle magazine. As a Club, we want Members who represent certain ideals, and I’d find it hard to call someone a ”Kennedy’s man” if he wasn’t a man of action.
 Men tend to like action-movies for the excitement, but also because consciously or subconsciously, we can see ourselves in that movie playing the lead role. At Kennedy’s, we help put our Members in that “lead role” of their life—and all they have to do is become a Kennedy’s man to become a star in their own right. Since we work on image, confidence, and knowledge in both our Clubs and in our magazines, there simply isn’t a good excuse to NOT employ this Wealth Magnet if one is a Kennedy’s man in good standing.

### Wealth Magnet 13: Integrity

#### At Kennedy’s, our honor is bound by our promises. Our guarantee is, “The Best Haircut and Shave You’ve Ever Had . . . or it’s Free![®] ” Now, we know we have something special at Kennedy’s, for I’ve mystery-shopped our supposed competition all over the country and still haven’t found anything I can “borrow” from any of them that beats our 30-step Signature Shave[™]
 process, for instance. So, we’re quite certain that the experience we provide is the best our clients will find (I also haven’t found any other barbershops with a guarantee on their service ). We’re so sure of it, in fact, that we’ve guaranteed it and put our money on the line. To me, that’s integrity: not only believing you’re the best, but doing what it takes to be the best, time and again (excellence for excellence sake ); and then putting it out there as

-----

#### proof, willing to risk something of value if someone so much as thinks you’re not really the best.
 Our reputation is at stake daily at Kennedy’s, but we wouldn’t be an award-winning barbershop if we didn’t act on our superior procedures and processes. That reliability creates raving fans and helps spur even more “word-of-mouth” advertising for us.

 Integrity is a powerful Wealth Magnet ... and it mostly comes down to doing the “right” thing in business. If you’re going to make bold proclamations in business, you better be able to back them up.

### Wealth Magnet 17: See What Isn’t There

#### Kennedy’s was created to fill the space in the marketplace between the “chop-shops,” as we call them, on one side, and the independent barbershops (where you have to worry if the 70-year old barber might cut your ear off due to his diminishing eyesight) on the other. Until Kennedy’s came along, most American men reluctantly trudged off to the scissor- wielding sister in the strip-mall who blabs about her ex-boyfriend or baby