#### moving up as we speak. After all, if you are worth $100-million or $10- million and temporarily see 10%, 20%, or even 30% of your net worth disappear, you are still worth $70-million, $80-million, or $90-million, or if starting with $10-million, still worth $7-million, $8-million, or $9-million. The loss is annoying, possibly scary, briefly. But it doesn’t change the fact that you are wealthy. Further, one thing about everybody who has amassed most or all of their wealth through their own ingenuity, effort, investment, and attraction (as opposed to inheritance, hitting the lottery, or having been president of the United States and then cashing in afterward) is that they know how to replace wealth lost; they know how to attract it, and are quite confident of their ability to do so.
 It happens that I travel by private jet myself, and I can tell you there was, recently, a downturn in all aspects of the private aviation business. But I can also tell you that there are still waiting lines to land at and take off from private terminals at many airports, multi-million dollar jets being purchased every day, and companies like NetJets ferrying about more self-made affluents you’ve never heard of than celebrities you have heard of, to and from their second and third homes, weekend golf games, vacations, and, of course, business meetings.
 The rising tide of affluence is so great we even added a newsletter to our stable, which I edit, devoted entirely to marketing to the affluent, and wrote an entire book on the subject, No B.S. Marketing to the Affluent .
 Anyway, if these are not the circles you hang out in, then poking your nose in there will be very good for you. Exposure to the reality of a world you may only think of as fodder for TV and movies and a few glossy magazines can alter your entire attitude about attracting wealth for yourself. The very idea of personal wealth attraction is easier to accept the more you personally see, experience, and understand just how much free-flowing wealth there is to attract. It’s a bit like never actually seeing the ocean from a penthouse balcony and only reading about it in a book or seeing pictures in a magazine—the enormity of it, the vastness of it just doesn’t hit you until you experience it in person.

## Be Where the Money Is!

-----

#### I edit a special newsletter entirely devoted to the subject of marketing to the affluent and mass affluent, the No B.S. Marketing to the Affluent Letter . Information at www.DanKennedy.com . There is also a book on the subject in this series, No B.S. Marketing to the Affluent .

 I suggest the following experiences: visit The Forum Shops in Las Vegas, Rodeo Drive in Beverly Hills, or Bergdorf Goodman in New York City. Vacation in Boca Raton, Florida, Scottsdale, Arizona, or Aspen, Colorado. Immediately go to your nearest bookstore and pick up copies of The Robb Report, Millionaire, Worth, and Town & Country magazines. Go on a field trip to a classic car auction or a racehorse auction. In short, in person and at a distance through media, immerse yourself in the lifestyles of the affluent. Not only will you be surprised at the prices cheerfully paid for goods and services, you’ll be more amazed at the vast array of very high-priced goods and services designed for affluent consumers—you’ll be even more amazed at just how many affluent consumers there are.
 The more aware you make your own mind—conscious and subconscious—of just how much affluence there is, just how much money is moving around, the more easily you will attract wealth. So this is no idle exercise I suggest. It is an important step in conditioning your mind to attract wealth. And, just as your body must be conditioned for health and fitness and longevity, your mind must be conditioned for wealth. This observing of money flowing around the affluent is such an important and beneficial exercise, I have taken one of my Wealth Attraction Coaching Groups to Disney’s Animal Kingdom Lodge on a “field trip,” all staying on the concierge floor, taking the Sunrise Safari, lunching with a staff Imagineer, eating in the five-star restaurants. I took my Coaching Groups on a field trip to The Forum Shops. I give subscriptions to The Robb Report as client gifts. Even if you are not yet living an affluent lifestyle, you must

-----

#### immerse yourself in expanded awareness of what it is like and how many people are.

 ‘I was at my sister’s today. They have two pots.“ © The New Yorker Collection 1983 Leo Cullum from cartoonbank.com . All rights reserved.
 To believe the streets are awash with money, you need to see streets awash with money. If there aren’t any in your own neighborhood, you just need to get out more!
 Neiman-Marcus invented the idea of offering extraordinarily expensive, unique items in their annual holiday catalogs years ago—initially, more as a means of getting publicity than making spectacularly profitable sales. However, over years the practice has led to Neiman-Marcus and many other catalog merchants inventing unusual gift offers. Several years ago, Victoria’s Secret offered a diamond encrusted bra for a million dollars. One

-----

#### of my favorites was presented in a catalog called Gentleman’s Domain : a product from the Eli Bridge Company, a manufacturer that builds amusement park rides, has been building them for the industry for 100 years. With the offer in Gentleman’s Domain, for a mere $300,000.00 you could have the real thing in your backyard, a 67-foot-high, 16-seat Ferris wheel. The catalog copy warned that you’d need a 220-volt power outlet. And since it weighed almost 20 tons, you may have wanted to have the patio checked out before getting started.
 There are two lessons here. One, another illustration of the amount of money flowing, and two, the opportunity to dip into the flowing stream as you wish, given enough ingenuity to create something captivating to people. While these kind of outrageous gift examples date back to 1955, when Neiman-Marcus began the creative exercise in response to the blossoming of the new oil-rich in Texas, it is a terrific success clue for The New Economy in which everybody expects something unique, of particular and precise relevance to them, and is willing to pay premium prices or fees for it. (In Neiman-Marcus’s Christmas catalogs: a jewel-encrusted tiger, a $588,000.00 stocked and staffed Noah’s Ark, and his-and-her jets.)
 Of course, most people’s reaction to an outrageous example like this is to cry “irrelevant!” After all, your customers don’t have this kind of money to blow, your customers are tight-fisted cheapskates, you have a hard time selling to your customers, yada yada. Pfui. A few years back, I produced an infomercialstyle video brochure for a client who builds top-of-the-line, expensive backyard sheds. Not the tin jobs you think of. These are more like miniature houses, with peaked roofs, doors, windows, flower boxes, and complete interiors, with workbenches, bookshelves, and cabinetry. The priciest of them could even be sold in the Neiman-Marcus catalog! To shoot the video, I took a crew to a number of the customers’ backyards, to see their sheds and tape their testimonial comments.
 One happy couple with not one but two sheds in their backyard, his-and- hers sheds, are both retired and on Social Security, and he’s got one small pension. They’re totally on a fixed income. Two sheds.
 Another guy with the biggest shed and a big pond in his backyard started out telling me something of a sob story. If you heard it, you’d assume he didn’t have two nickels to rub together. But somehow, miraculously, he dug up about $20,000.00 for landscaping and a koi pond, and another $10,000.00 for the shed.

-----

#### The truth, known to all smart marketers is: Everybody somehow finds plenty of money to buy whatever they decide they want to buy. There’s always a lot of “hidden money” in the market as a whole and in the vast majority of households and businesses. It hides from everyone failing to offer sufficiently motivating and interesting offers. It is invisible to entrepreneurs with vision blocked by their own ideas about the absence of available spending power .
 Lots of people complain about how tough they have it, raising a family, three kids, both parents having to work. Both parents and all three kids have cellphones; about $90.00 a month in charges. Both of the older kids are in not one but several activities: dance, karate, Little League. Both parents drive new autos. There’s a satellite dish on the side of the house, a big flat- screen TV in the den, a TV in every bedroom. They wouldn’t know “tough” if it bit ’em in the butt, and they freely buy whatever they decide to buy.
 It is a huge, huge, huge mistake for you to accept any part of the suggestion that money’s tight, hard to get, that your customers don’t have money or won’t spend it. And if by some freak, rare, incredible chance you actually have managed to put yourself into a position where the people you are doing business with are short of money or are tight about spending it, bubba, you choose your customers. Switch to some who freely spend. There are plenty of them out there. One of the keys to turning your wealth attraction power on to max is acceptance of all the responsibility for your outcomes in life. The nature of your customers, the responsiveness of your customers, the buying behavior of your customers in their relationship with you is your responsibility—not theirs and not anybody else’s.

## Don’t Buy What the Bad Newsmongers Are
 Selling

#### Beware the news media. For some perverse reasons of their own, about which I have my suspicions, the mainstream media constantly under-reports good economic news and over-hypes bad economic news. During the recent recession, the media loved to compare it to The Great Depression, to such an egregious extent that my friends at the prestigious Business And Media

-----

#### Institute at Media Research Center issued an entire, detailed report for the media, the public, and groups like my clients, de-bunking the comparison. It is a huge, huge, huge mistake for you to accept the mainstream media’s biased, liberal agenda-driven misrepresentation of the state of the economy or of the amount and level of opportunity in this country—at any time. And whatever you do, do NOT listen to any of the even more outrageously inaccurate assertions from Michael Moore and his ilk. There is a contingent of Moore-types who insist on promoting the idea that there is a teeny, tiny group of evil rich versus a gigantic population of viciously oppressed masses for whom there is no opportunity. The spew of Moore, and others who echo it, is toxic. I have written a lengthy article about this, originally intended for the No B.S. Business Success book, omitted through editorial decisions, and subsequently published in my autobiography, Unfinished Business, which you can find information about at www.renegademillionaire.com .

#### Visit BusinessAndMedia.org for research-based analysis of media reporting on business, financial, and political issues. BMI publishes
 my political column and numerous other leading columnists and thought-leaders, and posts new information and commentary daily.

#### The truth is that the biggest, fastest-growing, most expansive and expanding segment of the American population is mass affluent, not poor. Admittedly, this trend was temporarily slowed by recession, but demographics guarantee that it will pick up steam and hit a faster stride than ever before, post-recession, in The New Economy.

-----

#### Here’s something interesting about affluence. I was born in 1954. Owning the color TV in the neighborhood was a sign of affluence. When I was a kid, we were the only people in our entire neighborhood near Cleveland, Ohio, to have a swimming pool. That was a big deal. Getting a new car, a big deal. In the 70s, the two-car household was affluent. Now it’s a two-home household. A few years back, when I was still flying commercial, on a flight from Cleveland to Orlando, I realized through conversation that every single person in the first class seats owned a home in Cleveland and another home in Florida. There is, right now, this minute, more disposable income by any measurement—dollars, percentages, ratios, you pick the statistics you like—than ever before. There are more people invested in real estate in addition to their homes and in the stock market than ever, and despite stalls and reverse in values and value growth of these assets, there are more millionaires than ever before. The biggest wealth transfer in American history from my parents’ generation to mine is in progress, with another to follow, from my generation to the next.
 On top of that, new categories of products and services, new entertainments and recreations, new industries, new opportunities abound. Stop and think about all the businesses that didn’t even exist when you were a kid. I marvel at it all.
 It seems that every day, somebody invents another new means of attracting wealth. Consider the simple but fast-growing homebased business of mommy-blogging. If you’ve never heard of it, it’s nearly nine years old, and expanding exponentially. A growing list of major corporations have moved from merely giving free product samples to paying sponsorship fees, per-posting fees, and ad dollars to stay-at-home mommies who use and write about their products on their blogs, giving mom-to-mom recommendations. Most of these bloggers are small-time operators, picking up free products, a few hundred dollars a month, maybe an all-expense paid junket now and again, like a family trip to Sea World. But an increasing number are moving up to thousands of dollars in monthly income, some even more. There are even aggregators, organizing these fragmented solo operators into groups, under single umbrellas, so bigger dollars can be secured from advertisers. The activity has become so significant that, in mid-2009, the Federal Trade Commission began discussions about regulating it as advertising media and imposing requirements for disclosures about payments received by the bloggers. This grass-roots,

-----

#### made-by-moms activity is likely to morph into an organized, substantial industry generating hundreds of millions of dollars a year and, yes, creating wealth for many involved—as well as for up-and-coming businesses that find ways to use this unusual advertising and marketing media. This is but one of literally thousands of examples of new wealth-creation devices and opportunities springing to life all around you.
 I am absolutely convinced that if you don’t do well financially in America today, it is either due to utter ignorance of opportunity or choice. It definitely is NOT due to lack of opportunity. You need to be convinced of this, too.
 These fact-based beliefs are essential to turning off wealth inhibition and turning up wealth attraction. If you do not share these beliefs, if you doubt and question the fact of unlimited, readily available abundance of both opportunity and money, then you need to invest time and energy on your own fact-finding research mission and make this sale to yourself. Otherwise, to borrow from a past friend, the late Jim Newman, author of the fine book Release Your Brakes, you are driving down the highway to wealth, one foot on the gas but the other foot riding the brake.

## The Day That Changed a Doctor’s Money
 Awareness Forever

#### Let me tell you about a Critical Day In My Life.

 I was making small talk with a female patient, Sally R., who constantly fought me on receiving care, complained about what her insurance covered and didn’t cover, and told me she just couldn’t afford “all these adjustments”—even though she felt better with them, felt worse without them. This fateful Monday, Sally casually mentioned, “Could you be a little careful today? Saturday I had a deep tissue massage and I’m a bit sore still, mostly in my neck.”

 I was stunned. As if a bucket of ice water had been thrown in my face.

-----

#### But I stayed calm and in the same casual tone as hers, asked where she’d received the massage. And she told me—in glowing terms— of going to the new, fancy spa on Columbus Avenue. “My husband’s partner’s wife told me to go there to get a great facial. By the way, I don’t think you’ve ever met my husband. He and his partner own the big law firm across from the courthouse downtown, the one with the clock on the building’s tower. Anyway, when I went to the spa for my first appointment, they asked me if I had any other issues. ... I told them I come here to have my back cracked ... and they suggested I sign up for a package of deep tissue massages that would compliment the adjustments and help me feel better longer.”

 I was angry. Felt betrayed. Sally’d been poor-mouthing me to the point I’d reduced her per visit charges, and agreed to send her a bill at the end of each month rather than having her pay per-visit. Now I knew she was paying big prices—CASH—at a fancy spa. And was married to a prominent attorney. (I later got over being angry at her and rightfully got good and mad AT ME.)

 When Sally left, she even put off making her next appointments because “it’s just so expensive and I don’t want to run up too big a bill. I’ll call you if I start feeling badly. Thanks, Dr. Johnson.”

 Thanks Dr. Johnson, indeed.