#### What a barrier! If things start to get easy, if money starts flowing in faster, in bigger sums than ever before, the entrepreneur will subconsciously reject it and engage in all manner of self-sabotage to slow the unjust flow.
 The fact is, there’s no reason money has to be hard to earn or earned in hard ways. I’ve taught thousands of entrepreneurs how to earn much larger incomes more easily. There are so many ways this can occur, a hundred books couldn’t chronicle them all. I’ll try, though, to give you a sense of the range.
 For example, there’s Dr. Chris Tomshack, who had developed an extraordinarily effective marketing system for attracting patients to his chiropractic practice; on the back of this system, he went from owning and operating one clinic to two to three to four. But there he hit the wall. He found himself spread too thin trying to manage four clinics as well as one. He became frustrated by declining quality, burdened by more and more time going to managing staff and being taken away from his expert attention to advertising and marketing, and ended up actually working harder and harder for less and less. Expansion from four to six to ten was unimaginable. At my suggestion, he switched to franchising and, as of this writing, his company, HealthSource, has over 240 franchised chiropractic and weight-loss clinics throughout America, his income leapt from a very hard-earned six figures to a much more easily and pleasantly earned seven figures, and he is positively affecting the health of hundreds of thousands instead of thousands. Make no mistake, his life is not absent of work. He is now CEO of a fast-growing company, recognized by national magazines for its meteoric growth. But his work is not the “hard work” most think of, and his financial rewards have no proportionate connection whatsoever to hours worked or numbers of patients treated with his hands. His wealth is not limited by his own work, or by his ability and tolerance for hands-on management, or even by geographic boundaries.
 My client Dennis Tubbergen has changed the way thousands of upper-tier financial advisors secure clients and earn millions in fees and commissions, with the switch from arduous one-onone prospecting and presentations to small-group “focus groups” for qualified prospective clients, effectively leveraging the same work to a power of 8 to 12.
 Diana and Pierre Cotu, in a field dominated by low prices—pizza— focused on upscale, gourmet products, with their average large pizza priced from $22.00 to $38.00. The work of delivering 100 pizzas is virtually the

-----

#### same at their pizzeria as it is at, say, Pizza Hut or Dominos, but the profit is substantially greater. Their business doubled, by the way, in a peak year of the recent recession.
 Another client, Owen Garrett, a pencil artist, decided not to sell his art in traditional ways, like exhibiting weekend after weekend after weekend from morning to night at community art shows or endlessly soliciting and “working” gallery owners for a few spaces on their walls or a show now and then. Instead, Owen focused on the corporate market, where companies buy his works in series, collections, and in quantity, on a continuous basis, as client gifts and awards. He also used the internet, a newsletter, and other direct marketing media to build his own passionate, loyal following of fans who eagerly await his next new life-adventure and the artworks it inspires. As I write this, he has his own reality-TV show in the works. By controlling his own distribution, from pencil stroke to customer, he shares revenue with no one and builds equity not just in his creative product but also in his customer list and relationship with it. Also, because of the large customer base and the willingness of some to buy quantities of a drawing, he is never selling one drawing like an artist might at an art show, but he is able to turn that same drawing into several series of different-sized prints, selling hundreds of copies often within a matter of days of their release. I imagine the work of finding the ideal location, subject, and story and actually doing the drawing is about the same for one artist or the next, but one may only convert all that work into a single $100.00 or $1,000.00 sale, while Owen coverts it to tens of thousands to hundreds of thousands of dollars.
 My long-time clients Greg Renker and Bill Guthy, with whom I worked beginning with their very first TV infomercial (for an audio product based on the book Think And Grow Rich ), led a veritable revolution in the way skin care and cosmetic products are sold—in the process building a billion dollar business. Traditionally, specialty skin care and cosmetic products have been sold by direct sales forces such as Avon and Mary Kay, or at department store counters and in-store boutiques also staffed by trained sales forces. Beginning with a line linked to actress Victoria Principal, Guthy-Renker brought over a dozen different celebrity-brand cosmetic and skin care product lines to TV infomercials and thus direct to consumers, erasing layers upon layers of distribution, and all the work of recruiting, training, and managing salespeople, distributors, or retail operations. By far their biggest success has been with skin care products for acne sufferers,

-----

#### Pro-Activ, a business I helped push them toward. Their billion dollar success brought about by replacing traditional work with direct media follows a principle or strategy long used to create business breakthroughs; marry a fundamentally successful product with a different means of distribution. Every time you see a product demonstrated and sold on a TV commercial by a frenetic, high-energy pitchman—from the grand old master Ron Popeil to the recently famous Billy Mays (who died suddenly at a young age in 2009)—think about the origin of the pitch and, very likely, the product itself: the booth at the state or county fair, the pitchman there working hard all day to sell to small groups of people rather than tens of thousands of TV viewers. If you get your shoes shined at a stand at the airport or get a therapeutic massage in a chair at the same airport, remember such services were transplanted there by somebody with imagination and vision. If you pop into the convenience store and fill your car’s gas tank at its pumps, get yourself a Subway[®] sandwich or Krispy Kreme[®] doughnut inside the store, remember there was a time when there were gas stations and there were convenience stores but never together, and brand-name fast food concessions weren’t found at either. Even more germane to this topic is the switch from service stations to self-serve gas stations—the company pays fewer workers, the customer does the work, and the wealth still flows to the oil companies.
 I could go on forever, with examples of hard-work elements replaced by easy-work elements, or work leveraged through multiplication, in varied businesses small and large, and small made large as a result. The entrepreneurs connected with these examples had to be open to and alert for different substitutions for hard work and for traditional work.
 Even consider me. In 1996, I earned over a million dollars from speaking, requiring nearly constant travel, delivering more than 60 presentations during the year, as well as writing, publishing, and selling information products at every speech, and requiring a staff person to process all the orders and a vendor to ship products. In 2004, I earned a million dollars from coaching just five small groups of entrepreneurs who came and met with me, requiring only 26 days of meetings in my home cities plus 16 days talking on the phone while sitting in the sun on my backyard deck or in my big leather recliner in my library. Counting travel days and speaking days, in 1996, it required more than 200 days to earn what only 42 days provided in 2004. Considerably easier, less strenuous,

-----

#### less stressful days. This shift involved procedural changes in my business, changes in strategy, but also, of equal importance, continuous improvement of my thinking, understanding, even imaginings about money.
 Breaking free of the Work-Money Link has not been easy for me. I was raised to have enormous respect for work ethic. My youth experiences taught me that money is hard earned and earned hard. Shaking that, replacing that thinking is no simple trick. But that link is an illusion, not a reality.
 This is not to suggest that I don’t work or that you shouldn’t. In fact, I think work of some kind is necessary for sound mental and physical health. But there is work and then there is work . My Platinum Member Ron LeGrand’s motto is “The Less I Do, The More I Make.” It is subject to misinterpretation. It is meant as a variation on the “work smarter, not harder” theme. Personally, I work at working on my terms, on things that I enjoy, on high-yield opportunities and tasks, and I coach others to do the same. I am all about finding ways to make things easier, not harder. To do more with less. To gain leverage. But if you think and speak the belief of “hard-earned dollars,” you reinforce a barrier to doing any of these things.
 This is just one example of hundreds of negative, limiting statements routinely thought and said about money. They are all bricks strengthening and reinforcing the wall between you and attraction of maximum wealth.