## WARNING Highly Unflammable You Might Not Catch on Fire from Spontaneous Creative
 Combustion

#### (This’ll scare a lot of people.)

-----

#### “The biggest life lesson I learned is that you have to discipline yourself to do the work. If you want to accomplish something, you can’t spend time hemming and hawing and making excuses. You actually have to do it. I still have to go home every single day, know where I am, what I’m doing—and include 45 minutes of practice on my clarinet, because I want to play. I want to write, too, so I get up, go in, close the door and write. You can’t string paper clips and get a pad ready and play around.”

 —WOODY ALLEN

## PUSH

#### “Incredible things happen independently of those you personally create. When you’re pushing hard on Door A, someone or something opens Door B. Often, when you look through Door B, what’s behind it is much better than what you were going after in the first place. However, you wouldn’t have seen Door B open if you hadn’t been in the hall pushing on Door A.”

_—JACK M. ZUFELT, AUTHOR, THE DNA OF SUCCESS,_

_[WWW.DNAOFSUCCESS.COM](http://www.dnaofsuccess.com/)_

#### “Go through any open door. If there is no door, make one.”

-----

_—JOAN RIVERS_

####

-----

## Wealth Magnet 11

 Demonstration

#### T homas Edison is known to most simply as a famous inventor, the man who provided us with the electricity in our homes and businesses, and sound recordings—before the iPod. But, although Edison was a prolific and successful inventor, in his time, by those in business, he was recognized as even more adept at demonstration than invention. To attract the almost endless number of private investors needed to fund his experiments, often extending over years without producing marketable product or income, Edison staged a series of heavily publicized, secret-until-the-moment “events” at which he spoke about and demonstrated the next amazing invention he was working on. Interestingly, Edison admitted often showing off ideas and projects he had no real intention of proceeding with, because the thing he really intended to fund did not lend itself well to simple explanation or to a mesmerizing, dramatic demonstration. (Later, he would switch the investor’s stake from the faux project to the real one.) You may make what you will of his ethics, but you should learn from his

-----

#### commitment to Demonstration—even after his reputation was well- established.
 Houdini made his reputation by visiting hundreds of police stations and jails, letting the police officers handcuff and imprison him with their own equipment, then escaping. Word spread, the news media soon became fascinated, and Houdini had made himself marketable by Demonstration. A modern comparable would be motivational guru and TV infomercial “giant,” Tony Robbins, with whom I’ve appeared on seminar events a handful of times—Tony initially attracted media and public attention to himself with the “firewalk,” a Demonstration of the power of the mental techniques he taught; he and his students walked barefoot along a trough of red hot coals. Never mind that famous fraud de-bunker Dr. James Randi has exposed this as a mere magic trick that proves nothing about mind-power, and magicians Penn and Teller have thoroughly exposed it as carnival trickery on their TV show Bullshit on Showtime. It brought Tony the attention he needed, and he still incorporates firewalks in his expensive, multi-day seminars today, although they have never been used in any of the TV infomercials about him produced and owned by my long-time client, the Guthy-Renker Corporation.
 Today, of course, there’s a great deal more media than when Edison was working to attract his investors or Houdini was wriggling out of police handcuffs and escaping jail cells in order to attract the public’s attention. We’re in a 24–7 news environment, with a gigantic media beast with voracious appetite for the next spectacle. There’s also a lot of media you can directly control and use, at little or no cost, online—webinars, YouTube, Facebook, Twitter, etc. So a not-yet-famous chef or dog trainer or comedian or landscape designer or what-have-you can use Demonstration, to the public or to his own prospective clients or customers invited to “events” online, or use online media to invite them to actual events. Products can be demonstrated, virtual tours of properties provided, experiences presented for voyeuristic eavesdrop. Demonstration can be more easily done and disseminated than ever before. There’s really no excuse anymore not to be utilizing Demonstration in context of publicity.
 But there is more to this than the shrewd use of modern media, when you think in a broader sense of Demonstration as a Wealth Attraction Magnet. What Houdini understood and did so brilliantly was to make himself a 24/7 walking, talking, living Demonstration that was continuously attractive—

-----

#### not a video presentation turned on with the press of a button for a few minutes, then turned off and forgotten.
 Another great example is David Ogilvy, profiled in the brilliant biography The King of Madison Avenue, which I urge you to read. As its title suggests, Ogilvy, a former short-order cook and door-to-door cookware salesman, made himself into the king of the advertising industry principally through Demonstration. (And, often, by creating exceptionally successful advertising.) When David Ogilvy secured the Rolls-Royce automobile account for his fledgling, up-and-coming ad agency, he immediately purchased a classic Rolls-Royce (that he couldn’t really afford) to be driven about town in, park conspicuously outside his office building in New York, and ultimately be “caught in” and photographed by the media. He even procured a custom license plate: OMB2. The “OM” was for the agency name, Ogilvy & Mather; the “2” suggested the car might be the second Rolls-Royce in a fleet. It wasn’t. Although the now legendary ad he created for Rolls-Royce was itself a dramatic demonstration of his ability, and was then much talked about in the ad industry and in other business circles, Ogilvy took care and went to extremes to make sure few missed the connection, Ogilvy and Rolls-Royce. Every drive to lunch or the corner store was Demonstration.
 Think about Donald Trump, who I have also shared the platform with— as I have with his daughter, Ivanka Trump, his chief negotiator George Ross, and several Apprentice alumni. I’ve made quite a study of The Donald. It is my conviction that his penchant for plastering the TRUMP name all over everything, from building fronts to planes and his helicopter —seen zipping all over New York and New Jersey daily, and for licensing TRUMP as a brand for everything from bottled water to gourmet steaks sold on the home shopping channel QVC to his own how-to-get-rich books, is not ego. Or at least not just ego. Landing and exiting his helicopter emblazoned with his name, his private jet at the airport emblazoned with his name; dispensing instructions to Apprentice contestants with the Trump Tower emblazoned with his name behind him is all Demonstration of his importance, power, and success. A great many people want what Donald Trump has made himself a constant Demonstration of—success, power, and affluence. Luxury buyers want “the best of everything” that he stands for. Entrepreneurs want his success and wealth. This is the force that attracts them all to him, as viewers, book buyers and seminar attendees, consumers,

-----

#### hotel and resort guests, multi-million-dollar condominium buyers and real estate project partners and investors. His artful and strategic Demonstration is a wealth attraction force to be reckoned with.
 Ogilvy, incidentally, once, tongue-in-cheek, threatened to sue a magazine over speculating about his being a genius rather than stating it. Trump has, in fact, sued at least one magazine for understating his wealth. There are quite a few other similarities between the two, so that I wonder if Trump studied Ogilvy—Trump is a serious student and voracious reader. But he need not have, as the behaviors used by the two to attract attention and interest and build reputation so as to attract wealth have been used and are used by many others for that same purpose.
 While I was working on a draft of this chapter, Governor Sarah Palin, former vice-presidential candidate, did not quietly tender resignation from the governorship of Alaska with a letter, nor did she simply serve out her term but not seek re-election. She staged a sudden, unexpected, and dramatic announcement of her decision to leave office early on a Friday afternoon immediately before the July 4th weekend—a slow news period— in a picturesque setting outdoors, and delivered a passionate speech replete with quotable soundbites, drawing the nation’s attention to her as if she was afire. If it hadn’t been for Michael Jackson’s death, she’d have been the #1 news story for several days. As it was, she was still the #1 political story, the person you saw when tuning in to any political TV talk show, and in the top five news stories for more than a week—during which time she reportedly concluded her book deal worth over $1-million, and began fielding a veritable flood of offers for paid speaking engagements, TV shows, even product endorsements. Her Demonstration relit a fading spotlight and reinforced her cultivated persona as an unpredictable, nontraditional political figure, self-styled maverick, and frank, plain-talking person that “regular folks” could identify with. What becomes of her as a political figure may or may not be known by the time you read these pages. But I’ll wager, as I write these words, that she will have banked a great deal of money in the time lapsed between my writing this and you reading it.
 There may be no one person who has ever attracted so much success and fame, and built such an amazing business on the strength of Personal Demonstration as Hugh Hefner. Hefner’s iconic image, in smoking jacket; the Playboy Mansion; the publicized parties people nearly kill to gain admission to; most recently the three girlfriends are all Demonstration

-----

#### perfectly congruent with the reputation, brand, brand message, and motivations of the targeted consumers of Playboy.
 This congruency is important and powerful. I consider myself a thoughtful, thorough practitioner of such congruent Personal Demonstration. The better I’ve gotten at it, the more wealth has come to me. One of the key things I stand for, teach, and hold out as a prime benefit of understanding and using all my marketing, business development, and entrepreneurial success strategies is “autonomy”— meaning that you are the center of your universe, and you get to conduct business and live life entirely on your terms, doing business with whom you want, when you want, where you want, as you prefer. I’ve made almost every aspect of my life Demonstration of such autonomy.
 In another book in this series, No B.S. Time Management for Entrepreneurs, I describe why and how I (and others adopting my methods) do not use e-mail or a cell phone, take no unscheduled incoming calls, work only by pre-set phone appointments, and achieve extraordinarily high productivity by working entirely protected from interruptions. I own and professionally drive harness racing horses, competing in over 150 races a year, and want to be available to drive at my home track every night there is racing. So after 15 years traveling extensively and speaking 70+ times a year, I radically re-arranged my business to stay home and compel consulting clients, coaching groups, mastermind groups, and even entire conferences to come to me. My consulting days, presently at fees upwards from $18,000.00, are conducted at my home—which is not that convenient for clients to travel to, being about an hour from a major airport and absent of taxi cabs. My days end at 4:00 P.M., so I have ample time to rest, eat, and get to the track to race. My own staff-person who runs my private office is at the opposite end of the country and we communicate by fax as needed, brief phone calls three times a week, and once a week I receive a well- organized box of in-bound faxes, mail, phone inquiries, etc., that have accumulated during the week, and to which I respond at my convenience. My own phone calls are all clumped into two days a month of back to back appointments, each for 10, 20, or 30 minutes with definite end times; clients and others may wait two to four weeks before getting to speak with me. In short, I am famously inaccessible, my time and productivity famously protected, everything in my business life famously arranged for my convenience. And for the record, it was like this long before I could afford

-----

#### it. It is all done for practical reasons but it is also dramatic Demonstration. And people get that. While some are annoyed and put off and do not do any business with me as a result, many more are attracted, fascinated, curious, envious, and want to know how they can create similar autonomy for themselves.
 The way I work, the “rules” given to clients, the photos and videos of my racing shown at our websites and events and in my conference room, the classic cars I own and drive and show off, are Demonstration for me just as Trump’s collection of Trumplabeled jets and helicopters and buildings are Demonstration for him.
 In many respects, I think of myself as a “lifestyle brand,” like Hugh Hefner or Martha Stewart. And make no mistake, Martha and Hef are much alike in profitable use of Demonstration. In her television show and magazine, we see her homes, gardens, kitchen, and we get the sense that she lives what she espouses—and then hope we can get the same sort of elegance and artistry in our homes and lives by buying the products bearing her name. She is Personal Demonstration and her life is Demonstration. I, too, have media, although certainly not as far-reaching as hers; mine consists of a portfolio of newsletters read by my customers, online media read and viewed by our customers, and my appearances at events. Through those media I strive to convey a consistent, congruent Demonstration of the beneficial outcomes of adopting my strategies and philosophies, which people connect to by buying the books, courses, business tools, and other products bearing my name. Every story I tell, experience I share, activity I “show off”; the look inside my life and my living of it, is Demonstration. In my case, it has the added value of authenticity.
 There is a burden to it, by the way. I have to restrict myself from incongruent actions. Even if there’s a free shuttle bus to take me from a hotel a short distance to a convention center, I can’t be seen riding it; I must arrive in luxury sedan, driven by a chauffer. Even if I am tempted to immediately jump on the phone and return a call to someone who has inquired about making a deal, someone I’m eager to do business with, I can’t. I must let our process do its work; I must have my assistant schedule a phone appointment. I can’t do such things any more than diet and exercise guru Richard Simmons dare be seen at McDonalds wolfing down a Big Mac and a super-sized mountain of fries or Martha Stewart be seen at the mall in cheap sweat pants with stains on them and dirty sneakers. Even if

-----

#### Donald Trump found mowing the grass relaxing and therapeutic, he dare not be seen out there in shorts and a T-shirt, pushing the mower at Mar-A- Lago. He needs to be on the golf course, with celebrities or business leaders, wearing perfectly cleaned and pressed sportswear.
 Warren Buffett has cultivated the image of a simple, small town, not-Wall Street, folksy sage, who lives in a modest home bought many years ago, who prefers his neighborhood restaurant, and drinks Coca-Cola[®] just like “regular folk.” So he worried quite a bit about the incongruency of finally buying his own jet, appropriately named The Indefensible, and was relieved to replace it with NetJets’ service—after buying the company. Buffett is not eager to have his other luxury homes publicized, nor, when his wife was alive, have simultaneous existence of his official wife living apart and seen at certain social and business functions and his unofficial, at-home-in- Omaha second wife publicized either. For good reason: gross incongruency with his popular Personal Demonstration of a heartland-of-America, common sense, classic values guy, your wise uncle, stable and steadfast and, above all else, as trustworthy as the daily rising of the sun. Of course, given his wealth and status, he could afford the risk of such incongruities, but he has nevertheless been mindful of them, and has taken pains to minimize their public visibility. I recommend reading the comprehensive biography of Buffett, Snowball .
 You may think you are not a “lifestyle brand” like Hefner or Buffett or Martha or me, but why not? If you are a financial advisor or investment broker, what should you be representing by your own Personal Demonstration? Presumably affluence and financial security, perhaps autonomy. If you are a doctor, shouldn’t you be a Demonstration of good health and the virtues of healthy living habits and disciplines? Whatever it is that you sell or otherwise exchange for money, there is some sort of Personal Demonstration for it.
 So, for you, the questions have to do with how good a Demonstration you are for what you stand for, symbolize, and promise to your particular constituency of customers, clients, or investors. Are you a walking, talking, living, obvious and clear Personal Demonstration? Is your Personal Demonstration congruent? Could you strengthen your Personal Demonstration?
 Congruent Personal Demonstration is very, very magnetic.

-----

## And the Playboy[®] bunny keeps going and
 going and going ...

#### A demonstration of Demonstration