###### Given a large and loyal audience, Keith has a platform to promote others as well as himself, so why be all about one man? He owns a piece of the quickly made star Taylor Swift. Every time there’s a Taylor Swift music CD or download, concert ticket, T-shirt sold, or endorsement deal made, Toby pockets an override. Her recent five years’ earnings nearly match his, less, of course, his share. He also owns a piece of the recording company that has Swift, Tim McGraw, and Rascal Flats. His fast-growing chain of restaurants is organized to provide a 20-to-30-city tour for any rising star he takes on. There, of course, it’s his Wild Shot that’s the drink of choice. Many business owners, entrepreneurs, authors, and others have platform power that they don’t duly appreciate or value, that can be used to aid, promote, and lift others—whether for outright compensation, which I often refer to as “toll position income,” or for quid pro quo, reciprocal cross- promotion, or as pay-it-forward investment, or even just because the opportunity to be helpful exists with no harm, foul, or cost. Maybe an investment in karma. I’m frankly very pleased with myself that I’ve long done this, done it more and more as my own star has risen higher and my influence grown greater, and never worry about creating competition or trading away dollars or any similar miserly concerns.

##### Ownership and Control


-----

###### Early on, while still struggling, Keith replaced his band with musicians happy to play for a set salary rather than a share of the take. This and his other ownership moves, like owning the record label, have given him total control over his brand. When his first restaurant opened and he found they had drifted “gourmet” from his prescribed meal items, he stomped his foot and quickly got his way. His preferred fried bologna sandwich, which the suits had removed from the menu, is the chain’s number-one bestseller. By owning all or part of everything attached to his brand, he can control the use of the brand and prevent or fix mistakes made by others. It is inevitable that the visionary and personality who builds the brand and its following is judged at some point as having gone as far as he can go with his limited education or sophistication, and newly imported or hired professionals and experts know better. As a company grows, the cries for “professional management” intensify. What happened to his bologna sandwich often happens on a grander scale. No less than Steve Jobs was fired and thrown out of the company he built, only to later be brought back in, with considerable brand damage to repair. Howard Schultz, similar story, with Starbucks. Had he not returned, complete collapse was on the horizon.
 You will be challenged about your beliefs about your brand and about your marketing more and more vehemently the more successful you become. You might logically expect the opposite, but you’ll be unpleasantly surprised. In my consulting work, I strive to be very careful and thorough in unearthing what makes my client and his relationship with his customers tick, why people have been attracted, what’s in the sauce that is invisible to the naked eye and may not be discovered by casual tasting. I am cautious about altering or abandoning what’s working, preferring “plus-ing” as Walt Disney called it. Few outside experts or new investors or hired executives are as cautious and considerate. Most are over-eager for change for the sake of change. Many have big but fragile egos and a driving need to demonstrate their cleverness and exert their power as personal validation, not as practical contribution to greater success. Most ask too few questions and are in too much of a hurry to learn about the past or present before making the future. Never, never, never let yourself be intimidated by these people, even though you may need them. Keep my friend Bill Brooks’ definition of an expert consultant in mind: a man who knows 365 sexual positions but can’t get a date all year. You can’t be stupid-stubborn and


-----

###### totally closed-minded, but you don’t want to be intimidated or pushed around either. Nobody will be as committed to protecting your brand as you should be.
 It’s very hard to protect a brand you don’t own and own its chief uses. I know this firsthand because I have not owned my brands for a number of years now, and I’ve had working relationships post-sale with two different owners and companies and three different corporate CEOs, as well as four different book publishers. Such relationships are, I imagine, similar to a man of no means of his own married to a very rich wife. Battles must be chosen judiciously. You can’t go to war over every little thing. Compromises, even sacrifices, are required. This is a trade-off you may very well choose to make, just as I did, for my reasons or for other reasons, at some point with your businesses and your brand. If and when you do, try to get as much as you can while giving up as little control as you can, and know that the devil is in the details. I have managed to co-exist with two different owners for nearly 15 years without developing an ulcer, having a heart attack, committing murder, being fired, or being murdered, and with the brands I handed over alive and in reasonably good health. Not all entrepreneurs can do that, nor is it in every entrepreneur’s best interests. Just because somebody’s standing there with a check doesn’t mean you have to take it. One reason not to is the deep emotional connection to your brand as if birthed from your womb and raised by your own breast milk, and feeling it is fragile and vulnerable, so that any and every change made to it or the businesses attached to it feel like personal wounds. I happen to have a knack—a blessing and a curse—for emotional distance and compartmentalization.
 My guess, and it is only a guess, is that at some point, probably sooner than later, within years not decades, Toby Keith will wind up selling his entire business, copyrights, and intellectual properties and letting his name, face, personal brand, and brands be used right along with it, while he retires, plays golf even more than now, and does other things unrelated to the entertainment business. If and when he does, the brand will be used in ways he’s happy about and ways he’s unhappy about, and he’ll have forfeited his say-so. But that kind of equity and exit is one of the reasons to build a brand.


-----

##### Polarization

###### Toby Keith’s hit songs’ lyrics have consistently been jingoistic, reflecting right-wing extremes, patriotic themes, and military support. He is the son of a military veteran who never shies from flag-waving. The hit song he put out shortly after the first September 11 Attack Day (NYC, not the more recent Benghazi), titled “Courtesy of the Red, White and Blue,” includes this line: “We’ll put a boot in your ass. It’s the American Way.” He is perfectly happy offending with such material, and responding should someone pick a fight over it. Natalie Maines of the Dixie Chicks called the song “ignorant,” and Keith responded by displaying a made-up family photo of her and Saddam Hussein as a giant backdrop at his concerts.
 I have plenty of liberals in my fan base, in GKIC Membership, and in various relationships. I do pro bono work for the Cleveland Food Bank and for Happy Trails Farm Animal Sanctuary, both run by liberals. My mystery novel co-author Les Roberts (book title: Win, Place or Die) is a blue-collar liberal who reminds me of Studs Terkel, and he’s a recently converted vegan. Still, my conservative/libertarian politics are very clear in my written works and speeches and seminars. And I have not held back my ire and disgust for President Obama. The majority of my audience of small- business owners, entrepreneurs, and self-employed professionals skews conservative, at least fiscally if not socially. So I do tread relatively safe ground with most, strongly resonate with many, but undoubtedly offend some who must look past these positions of mine to otherwise benefit—and most importantly, I repel many.
 Deliberately repelling people from a brand is a more common practice than many realize. The CEO of Abercrombie & Fitch made headlines and sparked controversy and criticism by perhaps ill-advisedly detailing who he did not want patronizing their stores or ever seen wearing their apparel, and how he deliberately directed everything from store design to advertising to sizes of clothes stocked to clearly and adamantly tell those people they are not welcome. A & F is a valuable and powerful retail brand, with a lot of its value tied to an aura of exclusivity. There was a lot of expressed shock by pundits over his statements about this, but I was not surprised one bit.
 I believe that a price tag attached to power is polarization. Vanilla is only a successful position for ice cream.


-----

##### Prolific Output

###### Beginning back in 1993, Toby Keith released at least one new album every year through the year 2000, selling, on average, about 500,000 copies. His 1999 album sold 3.1 million copies. If you want a vibrant brand and brand loyalist population, I do not think you have any choice but to be extremely prolific. You must bring a lot of “new” to the table, frequently. You need constant communication—at GKIC, Diamond Members are “touched” one way or another by me at least 112 times during a calendar year, by GKIC itself above that at least another 100 times, and they see me in person at two national conferences and at least one special event. In total, we’re achieving near daily connection. I also strive for omnipresence, meaning every time you turn around in a complete circle in your environment or in your industry, you see, hear, hear about, or somehow bump into me. Just as Toby Keith wants his brand of booze on the bar in your man-cave, his endorsed pickup truck in your garage, his CDs playing in it when you drive it, I want my Dan Kennedy bobble-head, posters, and books in your office, my CDs playing in your car, and No B.S. logo apparel in your closet and on your back. This is a strategy I learned studying Disney.
 Even true-blue brand loyalists and longtime fans are increasingly easily distracted. They are under bombardment by seductions every minute in every media. “Brand loyalist” is really an antiquated word still used by all the brand academics, theorists, and agencies selling you on brand, and I’ve used it in this book as a convenience. But the truth is, loyalty is more of an endangered species by the day, and it is very, very dangerous to presume you have any of it, from anybody. The savvier position is that of the paranoid, as I described in Chapter 19. You get up each and every morning assuming your fences dissolved during the night and your entire herd has wandered off in 1,000 different directions, and you must ride hard to catch them, re-entice them to follow you, round ‘em all up, put up a new fence, grab a nap, and do it all over again. And, by all means, rely more on real, strong, solid fences than simple loyalty. In direct marketing, we build those, for example, out of membership, continuity or forced continuity with automatic recurring payments, and pain of disconnect ideally more complex than an emotional bond. These are strategies and tactics commonly found in businesses of varied kinds owned by GKIC-trained operators and


-----

###### entrepreneurs that you rarely find in the same kind of businesses absent GKIC influence.

##### Work

###### There’s a dirty word. People who build and sustain valuable personal brands work a lot and work at it a lot. The $1 million or so Toby Keith pulls out of a concert is pale in comparison to the other revenues of his personal empire, but he is nonetheless out there in person, on the plane, then on the bus, then on the stage, doing manual labor, being seen, pressing the flesh. Beyond that, he is writing songs; recording, finding, signing, and promoting other stars; doing deals; visiting restaurants; working. The “escape from work” attitude and delusion that has permeated society as a whole and, more troubling, the business and entrepreneur community to a far, far greater extent post-internet than preinternet, and even more so in very recent years, is a vile, evil cancer destructive to the American and world economies; to individuals’ mental, emotional, and physical health; and to society as a whole.
 I do not begrudge Tim Ferris’s phenomenal success with his original book titled The 4 Hour Workweek, nor with the 4-Hour brand he has built behind it. The content of the original book is better and more honest than its title, picked by popular preference via a Google AdWords test-marketing campaign. Tim has said complimentary things about me, and I certainly respect him. But. The very fact that this was the popular and successful title and that people would actually lust after and believe in the idea of grand success and four hours of work per week speaks volumes about the stupid sloth of the public. It’s not new. There was, decades ago, a huge seller titled The Lazy Man’s Way to Riches. But even it didn’t dare to say The Lazy Man’s Way to Riches With Just 4 Hours of Work Per Week. And now it’s worse. It’s shameful. It makes me embarrassed for my fellow creatures walking upright.
 If you closely follow the real schedules, activities, and disciplines of virtually any or every highly successful person, particularly one building or sustaining a valuable personal brand, you won’t find a four-hour week; you


-----

###### will find them doing a whole lot of work, out in public, and behind closed doors in private.
 I’ll quickly mention another entertainer who has built an incredible personal brand, Lady Gaga. If you don’t even know who she is, it’s perfectly okay. I have very smart and aware clients who only very recently discovered her existence and, predictably, found her bizarre. But you might very well want to study her, and a book worth reading is Monster Loyalty: How Lady Gaga Turns Followers into Fanatics by Jackie Huba. A few takeways: While she has talent and has invested a lot of time and work in developing it, she freely admits she’s far from the best singer out there. She is well aware that her openly expressed political and societal opinions are polarizing, but she defines her number-one job as playing to her fan base, and specifically to the top 1% of her fan base, those who buy everything and follow her obsessively, whom she calls her Monsters. She is more interested in keeping her current customers than attracting new ones, and she is not at all concerned with converting people who don’t understand her. One of her favorite quotes is, “If you are not pissing someone off, you are not doing your job.” That’s very close to a principle I’ve long taught, expressed: If you haven’t pissed off somebody by noon, you’re under quota. Get busy. Lady Gaga’s revenues exceed those of Toby Keith, by the way.

##### And What If You Have a Tired Brand?

###### It is relatively common for a good personal brand, and an entertainer, author, other celebrity, expert, or an entire company to outlive its productive, profitable customer base. It is even more common for a good brand to fatigue, to feel “been there, done that,” and lose its following to an inferior but newer person, place, or product.
 In the 2000s, the famous singer Tony Bennett was a tired brand. If you don’t know him for anything else, you might click with his most famous song, I Left My Heart In San Francisco. He is of The Rat Pack era, but has outlived all of them and is still performing, recording, and newly popular as I write this. His son Danny reinvigorated Bennett with a marketing strategy known as co-branding. You might be familiar with it thanks to Doritors tacos at Taco Bell, Jim Beam Bourbon enhanced steakburgers at T.G.I.F.’s,


-----

###### or other food co-brands. Ford has a King’s Ranch truck. Bennett was paired with the just-mentioned Lady Gaga, Carrie Underwood, and other very contemporary singers in a series of Duets albums that brought him to the attention of an entire generation of fans who would otherwise have ignored him. The strategy was stolen directly from Frank Sinatra, who did it with two of his own Duets albums in the 1990s.
 This was a double dose of new life for the tired Tony Bennett brand. First, same brand, same personality, same songs—to an entirely new audience, surprised to find themselves appreciative of their new discovery. Second, same brand attached to other, newer, hotter, trendier brands, making the old one seem and feel reborn as new, too.

##### Let’s Not Forget: Personal Brand-Building by DIRECT
 RESPONSE