## Preface

 How To Make Yourself Magnetic to Money

#### T his is not a book about MAKING money.
 This is not a book about CREATING wealth. Both words, “making” and “creating,” reinforce what I call the Work- Money Link, a limiting idea that we will change, a chain we will break in this book. Words like “MAKE” or “CREATE” suggest that you obtain wealth only through and in proportion to effort exerted. These words imply that wealth comes about primarily, if not only,z through hard work, through extreme exertion.
 This book is about the ATTRACTION of wealth. I use the word “attraction” most deliberately. In this book, I hope to empower and equip you to attract all the wealth you want. With far greater ease than you’ve ever imagined. Faster than you think possible. With less work than you would think possible. In any economic conditions—booms or recessions—including the fast-emerging New Economy that I will speak about extensively in these pages.

-----

#### This is a radical shift on several levels. There is a philosophical component, so we will be discussing your thoughts and attitudes and beliefs about wealth. But we will not stop there. As an early mentor of mine said, you can’t eat philosophy. There is a way of thinking that repels wealth, and that is, obviously, how most people think. There is a way to think that attracts wealth. If you think that way, you are magnetic to opportunity, money, and wealth. This is all-important, yet it is a hand often overplayed. A few years back, for example, there was an enormously popular made-for-DVD documentary promoting thought as the secret to wealth attraction, always an appealing promise, for obvious reasons, but a lie by omission. There’s much more to it.
 There is a strategic component. There are very practical things to do to put yourself in the right position, to set in motion the forces that attract wealth. I’m not talking about investing strategies; this is not a book about investing. You invest to create or preserve wealth. I’m talking about the attraction of wealth. So, relax, you need not fear yet another mind-numbing discussion of mutual funds and 401Ks and stocks and trends, illustrated with charts and graphs. Instead, we’ll be dealing with entrepreneurial strategies, relationship strategies, influence strategies, and marketing strategies that, properly employed, make you magnetic to opportunity, money, and wealth. There are new mandates of The New Economy, too, requiring new strategies and clearer focus on time-honored ones. All will be discussed here.
 Finally, there is a behavioral component. There are behaviors that repel wealth, and that is, obviously, how most people behave. There are ways to behave that attract wealth. If you behave that way, you are magnetic to opportunity, money, and wealth. Ultimately, it is my contention that wealth attraction is more about doing than thinking.
 In total, this is all about making adjustments to the way you think and act, that make it easier to attract all the wealth you want, faster and easier than you can imagine.



-----

## WARNING!

#### Yes, a warning: when I say radical changes in beliefs and behavior, I mean it. A lot of what you are about to read is going to be very hard to swallow. You will be tempted to instantly reject it. You will find it contrary and challenging to what you’ve been taught and what you believe. It will make you uncomfortable. It’s natural to simply turn off and move away from anything causing you discomfort. However, a great deal of discovery and growth and progress and success is preceded by discomfort.
 This is a very blunt book—The “No B.S.” in its title makes that promise. And a lot of what is published elsewhere about wealth is in the feel-good category. This book includes a fair amount of things those other authors probably know but keep to themselves, lacking the courage to say them publicly, certain they will offend people. I have never been concerned with who I may offend and I’m not about to start worrying about it now. I didn’t even sugarcoat many of these discomfort producing statements, building up to them gently, wrapping them in entertaining parables. This IS the No B.S. truth about how entrepreneurs attract wealth, as I know it.
 To avoid having wasted the price of this book and, more importantly, to avoid missing out on incredible opportunities to transform your life for the better, you need to tolerate some of this discomfort, to patiently and carefully consider ideas and suggestions that at first seem dead wrong, illogical, irrational, and unreasonable to you.
 To encourage you, I’m going to briefly describe my “qualifications,” to convince you that I am a person you should take seriously, even though I’m presenting ideas you find difficult to accept. I tell you these things not to brag. I have no need.
 I started out in life broke, no family resources. I have no college degree. By traditional predictive factors, I’m a man least likely to succeed. Before age 50, solely via my own entrepreneurial pursuits, I had amassed sufficient wealth to allow me to stop working and never make another dollar if I so chose. I have built, bought, sold businesses, developed hugely successful businesses, even invented an entire industry. I have achieved prominence, some degree of fame. In recent years, money has flowed to me in ever

-----

#### increasing abundance even as my interest in it has waned. I have made millions of dollars a year in personal income. I own a nice home, own many racehorses, own other good investments, classic cars, have zero debt, and live exactly as I wish in every respect. I work closely, privately with hundreds of multimillionaire and seven-figure-income entrepreneurs, most of whom have created their businesses from scratch, many quickly, many with my assistance from the start. These millionaires literally stand in line and pay huge sums for my advice. These people take me very seriously. I have taught them how to go beyond the making of money to the attraction of wealth.
 This book, incidentally, is, in part, derived from a seminar I conducted only once, by my choice, attended by about a hundred entrepreneurs, each paying about $1,000.00 for the privilege. It is also based, in part, on discussions from a Wealth Attraction Coaching Group that I worked with, comprised of 18 entrepreneurs, most enjoying million and multi-million dollar annual incomes, each paying $14,000.00 to be in the group. My lowest consulting fee is currently $18,800.00 for a day, a substantially higher hourly rate than top lawyers and law firms or top doctors can command, and I’m pleased to say, there’s usually a waiting list.
 Again, I tell you all this to evidence the value and validity of the ideas in this book, even though they may seem “weird” to you.
 If you stop to think about it, it’s probably true that most of what you’ve been taught about money, opportunity, and wealth was taught to you by people without wealth. Most of what you’ve read or heard about wealth was said or written by the unwealthy. Most of the people you’ve associated with, whose opinions about money you’ve heard often, aren’t wealthy. Most of what is your present Belief System about wealth was built with raw material you obtained from unwealthy sources.
 In stark contrast to those sources, I am a wealthy source. If my ideas didn’t contradict, conflict, and challenge those in your present belief system, something would be wrong!
 Incidentally, I fully realize you may be quite successful in your own right. I suspect that’s the case. Poor people rarely buy books with “wealth” in the title, just one of the many reasons they stay poor. So I do not discount your accomplishments or your knowledge. But I’ve worked with a great many successful people who struggled mightily to get there, who succeed despite their beliefs about wealth rather than thanks to them. I have watched

-----

#### such people go through the most amazing transformations and liberation with the ideas in this book. You will meet some of them in the book. No matter how successful you may be, I am confident you will find some ideas in this book that will surprise you, shock you, challenge you, liberate you, benefit you. I am confident that Donald Trump could read this book and find something to use, to attract even greater wealth, more easily than ever before.