## Be an Expert Somebody

#### Expert status is very magnetic. Fortunately, it is a self-created, self- manufactured asset.
 The great success educator Earl Nightingale said you could make yourself a world-class expert in most fields simply by studying every available resource for an hour a day for just a year. I took him seriously. I made myself into a top expert in the field of direct marketing entirely through self study, with no academic or experience qualifications whatsoever, in less than three years, and charged high fees from the very beginning. I have also successfully positioned myself as a marketing expert in several specialized fields—for example, well over 10,000 chiropractors and dentists have attended my practice-building seminars, bought my books and courses on practice marketing, been in coaching programs, etc. I built the largest seminar and publishing company serving these professions in the early ’80s, I’ve been hired to speak for five different, major practice- building companies as well as state dental and chiropractic associations, and was once named “Practice Guru of the Year” by a major trade journal in dentistry, yet I’m neither a chiropractor nor a dentist.
 I am fond of a quote I got from a fellow direct-response copywriter John Francis Tighe: “In the land of the blind, the one-eyed man is king.” If you know more about “x” than your intended clientele, you ARE an expert! It is

-----

#### very important to understand that giving yourself expert status and presenting yourself as an expert has little, if anything, to do with securing permission from authority figures or collecting alphabet soup designations, certifications, and diplomas from others. In most cases, the marketplace does not discriminate between such “official” recognitions of expertise and self-manufactured declarations, representations, and demonstrations. This is very disconcerting and difficult to swallow for those who’ve devoted years to obtaining the official approval of others, but their refusal to differentiate between the way their peers judge expertise and the way the public understands expert status only gets in their way of attracting wealth. Peer approval very rarely makes anybody rich.
 Obviously, everybody prefers working with experts. This is especially true as you climb the affluence ladder; the more affluent the customer, the more determined he is to find and conduct business with the most knowledgeable, respected, and celebrated expert, and the more willing he is to travel further away from home, wait longer, do business on your terms, and pay premium fees or prices. But really, everybody prefers dealing with an expert if and when they can. If you suffer from blinding headaches, and you can get to the doctor who wrote The Official Guide To Drug-Free Headache Relief, who has a newspaper column about headaches, which you’ve seen, who’s on the radio, you would rather go see him about your problem than any other “ordinary” doctor.
 In The New Economy, presenting yourself as an expert, and being accepted as an expert, is of multiplied importance. The recession experience has conditioned consumers to be more thoughtful, selective, and discriminating about how they spend their money and who they spend it with. So many lying to them and so many exposed as emperors with no clothes—including major Wall Street firms, giant banks and insurance companies, the venerable General Motors, as well as government agencies and, of course, politicians—has heightened skepticism. The New Economy customer is skittish about trusting anybody, trying to be more prudent about spending, and in greater need of reassurance. Expert status is reassurance.
 Experts encounter less fee or price resistance, so, usually, they can charge premium prices, enjoy above-average profit margins, and, if they choose, derive greater income from fewer clients or customers. Because my client Darin Garman is an expert in profitable, “peace-of-mind” investing exclusively in heartland-of-America apartment buildings, he can attract

-----

#### investors from all over the world as well as dominate his local market in Iowa, charge an access fee and monthly membership fee just to be permitted to purchase properties from him, and never, never, never discount commissions. Because Bill Hammond’s elder law practice specializes in working with families with a senior with Alzheimer’s, his fees are at the top of the pyramid, mandatorily packaged and not available for cafeteria purchase, and rarely questioned. Of course, you may think you are not in a profession that lends itself to expert status. My contention is that every business does. So I could tell you very similar stories about carpet cleaners, lawn and garden companies, auto repair shops, even an industrial tarp manufacturer positioned as experts and specialists, prospering from carefully chosen target markets, selling their goods and services for 5 to 25 times their industry norms.
 If you have a long memory, you may remember the Mr. Ed television show featuring the talking horse. A line in its theme song was: “A horse is a horse, of course, of course.” But to horse owners, a horse is not a horse. I own about 20 harness racing horses, which are their own breed called Standardbred. These are the kind that race pulling two-wheeled racing carts called sulkies, and have drivers, not jockeys. The horses that race in the Kentucky Derby are a different breed, Thoroughbred. While both often retire to second careers as pleasure horses, trail riding horses, and even competitive jumping horses, there are other breeds more typically preferred by owners for those purposes. Owners of each kind of horse are suspicious of therapies or professionals used by owners of other types of horses, so those of us involved in harness racing much prefer veterinarians, equine chiropractors, and farriers who we know to be expert in caring for harness racing horses, as well as nutritional and therapy products made for harness racing horses and endorsed by top trainers of harness racing horses. Endorsements from top Thoroughbred trainers carry little weight with us, endorsements from top trainers in our world carry little weight with those in Thoroughbred racing—and if I were selling an ointment, liniment, or nutritional supplement perfectly suitable for both, I’d bottle it with two different names and labels and bring it to the separate markets from two different companies.
 An important point to remember about self-manufactured expert status is that the smaller, narrower, and more specific the market you want to appeal

-----

#### to, the easier it is to fashion and present yourself as an expert in it, and to become known and accepted as such.



-----

## Wealth Magnet 9

 Be Somewhere

#### I n the midst of one of his dark periods, when the news was filled with stories of his financial demise, Donald Trump talks about feeling like just staying hidden at home but instead strapping on his tuxedo and going to an important gala—because he knew he could not possibly gain by staying home. At a time, some 30 years or so ago, when I was captain of a company everyone in its industry knew to be in deep and dire financial circumstances, I considered skipping that year’s convention. But I didn’t. It might have been less stressful, less embarrassing, more comfortable to stay home. But I couldn’t possibly gain by doing that. I went. I put myself in a place where it was at least possible that good, productive, profitable things could happen—and they did.

-----

#### Wealth won’t find you if you are at home slouched on—or hiding under—the couch.

#### Hopefully, you aren’t in the upside-down financial condition I was, or Donald Trump was, at the above-mentioned times. But regardless of your circumstances, you have to make a point of putting yourself in places where opportunity can occur. My father passed on a pair of cufflinks to me with the letters: YCDBSOYA. They stand for: Y ou C an’t D o B usiness S itting O n Y our A ss.
 While this refers to personal movement and placement, such as the meetings and conferences and cocktail parties and community events you attend and make yourself visible at, it also goes far beyond that. As an example, consider this book, and the other 14 books I have written and had published. For more than 18 years, I have been on bookstore shelves without interruption. I have worked hard to make that happen. Why? I can assure you, not for the royalty income paid to me as an author; that represents less than 1% of my income. I want to be on those bookshelves because people discover me there—who might never discover me otherwise —and become Glazer-Kennedy Insider’s Circle[™] Members and newsletter subscribers, attend seminars, become private clients, or bring me other opportunities. Being there, on bookstore shelves, has both directly and indirectly enriched me by millions of dollars. I can specifically identify more than a dozen long-term clients who have each spent between $100,000.00 and $300,000.00 with me. I have been sought out for speaking engagements purely because a corporate executive bought and read one of

-----

#### my books. For me, Being Somewhere includes being on bookstore shelves, including this book, which is now in your office or home.
 That does not mean you must write a book. It is an example of the wealth attraction power of being somewhere. Because the most important words in the above paragraph are “discover me” and “sought out.” This is marketing by attraction.
 Being Somewhere for the local insurance agent or financial planner, for example, might mean speaking to local groups of dentists, chiropractors, M.D.’s, and other high-income professionals; creating and mailing a good, informative, expert-position enhancing newsletter on financial matters to a targeted list of such prospects every month; appearing regularly on a local radio show; serving on the board of an important charity. Almost any entrepreneur can be somewhere via speaking, writing, publishing, networking, even serving, with it all carefully chosen to facilitate the right people taking notice and ultimately seeking him out for advice and information or bringing him new opportunities.
 This gets us to the subject of “place.” Enormous wealth—and fame—often comes from re-location, not necessarily in the geographic sense, but in terms of media or market space. Comedienne Joan Rivers, with whom I did some writing and consulting work some years back, created an immensely prosperous business and a career renaissance and new fame by moving from stand-up comedy and regular TV to QVC, the home shopping network. That prominence and reputation as entrepreneur even led to her gig in the 2008 Celebrity Apprentice —which she won.
 Several years ago, Harley-Davidson began focusing aggressively on women riders and buyers, and moved that sales activity out of their regular dealerships and showrooms to “garage parties” ala Tupperware.
 During the recent recession, a number of my clients who had replaced trade show exhibiting, speaking at conferences, and organizing and conducting their own road-shows with introductory seminars or group demonstrations held in hotel meeting rooms in a string of cities with less cumbersome, less laborious media, like webinars, teleseminars, and video- conferencing were forced to go back out into the marketplace themselves or put sales representatives and sales teams back out on the road. Some found this retro relocation so profitable they are committed to continuing it post- recession, for the foreseeable future. Conversely, a client of mine, an

-----

#### attorney who specializes in ultrasophisticated asset protection for affluent entrepreneurs and CEOs, who principally attracted clients by speaking at very select conferences, has recently found—as a pleasant surprise—that putting highlights of his lectures and some interviews on YouTube is bringing appropriate clients just as convinced of his elite expert status as those who encounter him as a lecturer at venues like cruises for wealthy investors, with workshops presented by financial, investment, and political authors.
 In place strategy, there are obvious and non-obvious choices, and often the big breakthroughs come from the non-obvious.
 One of the things I try to get every entrepreneur, marketer, and professional to think about is being in more places than anyone in their category of expertise or services typically puts himself. Most people are very limited, get comfortable with only a few places, and stay there. My advanced version of the “Be Somewhere Wealth Magnet” is: Be everywhere that’s relevant, everywhere your ideal customer or clients are, and be omnipresent in those environments.

#### A list of my other books appears on page 243.

 You can also preview sample chapters and excerpts of many of
 these books at www.NoBSBooks.com .