#### quickly. Competitors on Donald Trump’s Apprentice and Celebrity Apprentice television shows have told me the difference between surviving and leaving early, between winning and losing, had as much to do with being able to handle the intense pressure and fast pace of unfolding events as it did anything else.
 These are all examples of pace at work. Pace is not simple speed. In the horse racing in which I’m engaged, for example, the outright fastest horse wins fewer than 30% of the races. Instead, it’s up to the driver to pace the race, buy his horse millisecond breathers and rests, if leading, to regulate the pace of the race so he has some gas left in the tank for the stretch drive. But pace is about speed a lot, too, and The New Economy is very, very intolerant of the slow. We live in a nowtime world, people consumed by connectivity, instant communication, news known as it occurs or mere minutes later, and constant change in just about every field of endeavor. In business, what’s called speed-to-market in corporate circles has never been more important.
 As there is a certain rhythm to the city of New York or to interacting most effectively with thousands of attendees at a conference and to the conference itself or to a horse race, there is a winning rhythm to sales, negotiation, alchemizing ideas, launching products, business operations, and attracting money. I have thought about this a great deal and wound up unable to break it down and teach it like dance steps, 1–2–3 cha–cha–cha, quarter turn left. I’m afraid it’s more like innate rhythm—you either got it or you don’t.
 If that’s the case, why even mention it in this book? Because it plays such a big role it is out of integrity to omit it. There is, for example, a rhythm to successful deal-making. You need a certain level of speed and momentum from start to finish. Not reckless or desperate speed, but a pace that builds on itself and creates enthusiasm for getting the deal done and moving onto implementation. If you do deals, you feel it. Or you don’t, and when you don’t, you know there’s trouble. I’m betting every good deal-maker has this same sensation and works at creating it, but probably can’t lay it out in steps any better than I can.

-----

#### “There’s a kind of rhythm to making money that something inside me responds to.” © The New Yorker Collection 1981 Robert Weber from cartoonbank.com . All rights reserve
 Here’s something even more bizarre to most: I actually feel money coming to me before it arrives. I know within the first hour or so if today is going to be “a money day” or not, regardless of what activities are scheduled. As example, a day not too long ago brought a prospective client I’d met with over a year ago and forgotten about back to the table, seemingly “out of the blue,” now ready to start a project paying me over

-----

#### $100,000.00. After receiving the fax, I realized I’d had that tingling sensation all morning but had nothing on the books that day to warrant any expectation of directly making or receiving money.
 The flip of this is the more of that feeling I can create, the more money is attracted to me. One of the ways I create that feeling is by pace. By picking up the pace of work, for example, I find I not only get more done and move projects and people forward faster, but I create a special kind of kinetic energy that is exceptionally attractive to money.
 I watch a lot of people drain all the energy out of a good idea or a promising deal with slow and steady and methodical pace. Details that can easily be resolved later or, even if difficult, would be resolved later by people already in the soup together become obsessed over and turn into insurmountable, opportunity-killing obstacles before they ever need to be confronted. For me, and most wealthy entrepreneurs I know, success is cooked in messy kitchens. Ingredients on hand are substituted because no shopping list was meticulously made. Some yelling and cleaver waving may go on. It’s all part of the pace of high performance and major accomplishment. If you slow things down to prevent every problem in advance, you risk everything stopping altogether.
 One application of this, that I talk a lot about in my Renegade Millionaire System, is: simultaneous, not sequential. Using deal-making again as example, one I put together for a client, getting his company access to a bigger competitors’ customer lists via three joint venture marketing campaigns, offered a million dollars or more in profit via customers moved from them to him for unlimited future use, but I had no idea which of the three projects would prove fruitful, which would disappoint the joint venture partner profoundly. I structured the deal for all three to move forward and be implemented simultaneously for that very reason. Literally, one campaign would work its way through their lists Z to A over a few weeks while another traveled A to Z those same weeks and the third overlapped the other two. I also got the deal in place quickly from first tentative conversation to done by hopping on a jet and flying there, then handing it off with a timetable agreed to in principle, that would lead to very quick implementation, a pace intended to prevent re-thinking and equivocation. Sadly, the client engaged in timidity, and converted this to sequential rather than simultaneous, easily getting the other party to welcome a more prudent and methodical approach, testing one campaign at

-----

#### a time, with time in between each to assess results. Worse, the speed of implementation of the first went from weeks to months. You can predict the outcome without me finishing the paragraph. The first initiative produced minimum, disappointing results, everything else was scuttled, the relationship fizzled, the opportunity died. In reality, it was still-born.
 Presented with a very similar situation more recently, I kept control, set multiple new initiatives moving forward at fast pace, and will be just fine if only one works out as intended. Incidentally, as a very nitty-gritty detail insight, let me tell you how I moved that negotiation forward over just a few days, without violating the sanctity of my work regimen of limited access and control of clients including never taking unscheduled incoming calls and playing phone tag. On three occasions, I faxed additional information and suggestions, then gently dictated the time of a phone call the next day, indicating in the fax that I would have a brief window, from, for example, 1:00 P.M. to 2:30 P.M., and would call and try and connect several times during that window, but would not be accessible for return calls. On each occasion, guess what? The CEO was right there, on the dot, waiting for my call. As I said, the winning driver, if leading the race, must control its pace.
 When I said earlier that the rhythm of this seems innate, and that you’ve either got it or you haven’t, you may have thought “ Well, I don’t have it and that’s that.” I think that over-simplifies and too easily disqualifies. If you consult dictionary and thesaurus, you’ll find that innate does mean inborn, natural, and unlearned. But it also means instinctive, intuitive, and hard-wired. Experts in intuitiveness—from the famous Amazing Kreskin to more serious psychologists and academics—believe that most people have more intuitive powers than they realize or let themselves use. If you look at the work of Dr. Sidis, Dr. Edward Kramer, to some extent Montessori, you’ll find the belief that education engineered as a stuffing in of information and skill is a narrow view. Instead, their belief is that we are born with an enormous range of innate intelligence and the role of education should be to draw it out of us and empower us to access and use it. The word “educate” has Latin roots, educat and educere, which translate as led out and lead out—not stuff in. Finally, if your spiritual beliefs include a beneficent God, then you have to believe you are hard-wired to attract prosperity. All this suggests to me that, while you can’t learn the pace of wealth attraction like you might learn dance steps or installing a toilet, you

-----

#### already possess this innate intelligence and need only let it emerge from within and begin working for you. This is, I believe, facilitated by actively working on and with all the other Wealth Magnets contained in this book. In concert, they create an environment conducive to this pace.
 As an analogy, consider another power; the power of acute observation. The enduringly popular fictional detective Sherlock Holmes was able to make extraordinary deductions primarily by observing what others could have but did not. His mind was conditioned to take note of minute detail. The details were there for anyone to see. The ability to do so is very likely innate intelligence we all possess. The currently popular television program The Mentalist on CBS features a Holmsien main character, who has come, by his exceptional observatory powers, from a life as a charlatan mind reader. Truly extraordinary face-to-face sales professionals exhibit and rely on being able to “read people” in large part by observing a myriad of little details in their dress, demeanor, speech and language, body language, physical environment. I’ve seen people go from being utterly tone deaf in this way to very adept as a result of becoming employed in selling, without ever getting force-fed education or training about it, through experience— but that experience is really the placing of themselves in an environment conducive to and demanding of them letting this innate intelligence awaken and rise up out of their own subconscious.
 In short, there’s hope. There’s reason to expect yourself to grow more and more adept, naturally adept, automatically functioning at creating the pace of wealth attraction.