#### • Speaking . Way back when, early in my business life, promoting on a
 local level, I spoke just about anywhere good customers for me might be found, free for a year or so, then for fees as well as promotion. The first year, I spoke at more than 100 in-office sales meetings of different small companies alone, plus other venues. Heck, if you had a birthday party of any size, you could skip the clown; I’d come speak. For a decade, nationally, I spoke professionally, and was very well compensated, some 60 to 75 times a year and just about lived at airports and hotels, acquiring lots of customers with lasting value every step of the way. Today, I speak much more sparingly and selectively, about three to five times a year outside of Glazer-Kennedy Insider’s Circle[™] . Each such engagement involves a lot of advance promotion, preparation, and after-the-fact follow up to harvest all the benefits.
 • Other “Pressing of the Flesh.” My private clients often rise up out of
 large numbers of people who attend Glazer-Kennedy Insider’s Circle[™] conferences, or come to local Chapter meetings, or know of me from many things but finally get to have a face-to-face conversation with me at some event. Several times a year I put myself in such an environment. For many years, I did so much more often. I also find that “manufactured social settings” are very valuable. In my case, that means hosting things like a Night at the Races after a multi- day seminar I’ve spoken at, giving me an opportunity to just hang out with people. This usually yields business on the spot or immediately afterward.
 • Connecting. I’ve organized things so I’m at the center of big circles
 of people and businesses and things going on around me, and made a point of building one helluva a Rolodex[®] . If I don’t personally know the person you need or the person who should be linked with you to produce big profits from married opportunities and assets, I at least know the person who does know that person. I do a fair amount of behind-the-scenes, uncompensated brokering of relationships, deals, match-ups that benefit both. This builds up the bank of goodwill I can call on as needed or as opportunities present themselves.
 • Deal-Making. I’m often putting one of the businesses I am connected
 to together with an outside company, so we can leverage something they have, and they can profit from something we have.

-----

#### • Regular Writing Workload. I write five newsletters, a weekly fax,
 periodically post to a blog, and several new multi-media home study courses or online courses or multi-day seminars per year, for Glazer- Kennedy Insider’s Circle[™] . This is product we deliver but it is also ongoing promotion, interesting people in what’s new, keeping people interested in us. It’s the glue of the entire multi-million dollar, diversified, and far-flung enterprise. I also write sales letters and marketing materials.

 In addition to all this, I maintain a busy schedule of private consulting days, major advertising copywriting work as a freelancer for clients, a day each month of back-to-back private coaching calls with my Platinum clients, several multi-day meetings a year for them, a group call once a month for Diamondlevel Glazer-Kennedy Insider’s Circle[™] Members, an extensive research and information gathering effort, occasional travel to meetings or speaking engagements, and, of course, the nitty-gritty grunt work of running my little business, which I do with but one staff-person, located far away. (The Glazer-Kennedy Insider’s Circle[™] business is run by Bill Glazer with some 30 employees.)
 Every day, a multitude of things to keep the pipeline primed with new business, and to respond to the business reaching boiling point, and to deliver the work already committed, are all going on simultaneously at quick pace, and typically under deadline pressure .
 I’m confident, if you were to shadow me for a week, you’d leave saying it’s no wonder he’s so successful—look at everything he does. I’ve dealt with the “how can he do all this?” in my book No B.S. Time Management for Entrepreneurs, if I aroused curiosity about that.
 So here it is. Those who seem to easily attract more opportunity, more co-operation, more resources, more success, more recognition, and more wealth than any one person could ever need or want may do it easily, but not effortlessly. In fact, they do it by creating a powerful magnetic force manufactured, essentially, by running around in a circle managing a multitude of activities around that circle, at very, very high speed and frenetic pace. The resulting energy is very attractive.



-----