# CHAPTER 7

STRATEGY 7 DO EXPECTATIONS GOVERN
 RESULTS?

## It was a big surprise to me when I first discovered that many people actually go into situations expecting to lose.
 When my friend Brendan Suhr was an assistant head coach with Chuck Daly, when he and Daly coached the then dominant Detroit Pistons, he was asked what the big difference was between them and other NBA teams. Brendan said that, unlike other organizations he’d been with, everybody with the Pistons genuinely and whole-heartedly expected to win every game. I got a nearly identical answer from Jimmy Johnson about the dominating Dallas Cowboys team he built and coached. In neither case, incidentally, was this a statement of arrogance, swagger, or empty positive thinking; it was reflection of diligent preparation, organization, and skill. If you don’t honestly expect to win, you’re probably entering a selling situation with a customer you should not be investing your time in, or a situation for which you are not properly and thoroughly prepared.
 In very recent years, one of my activities, in my role as chief strategic advisor to Glazer-Kennedy Insider’s Circle[™] has been working with Bill Glazer on planning, choreographing, and establishing sales expectations for our two major, internationally attended Member-conferences held during each year. These are complex events, with many general and break-out sessions; celebrity guest speakers like Gene Simmons from KISS or Ivanka Trump, celebrity CEO’s like Terry Jones from Travelocity, Peter Shea from Entrepreneur Media (this book’s publisher), or Jim McCann from 1-800- Flowers; 1,000 to 1,500 attendees, meal functions, exhibits, dozens of seminar presenters—and sales activity, requiring decisions about appropriate resources to be offered, prices, offers, speakers’ presentations, merchandise in the onpremises store, and expectations for every speaker, every offer, total purchasing per attendee, revenues per hour, day, in

-----

## entirety, and more. Make no mistake, we take our responsibilities to these events’ attendees very, very seriously, and go to extreme lengths to deliver exceptional, practical value—evidenced by more than 70% of attendees returning year to year, and uninterrupted yearto-year growth even in recession. But also, to be candid, we take our task of creating the maximum possible income from these events just as seriously. We determine in advance precisely what we are expecting in sales results before going in. We do not “do our best and hope for the best.” The process is much more scientific, deliberate, and painstaking than hope.
 It so happens I know hundreds of other people in the business of putting on seminars and conferences, and have many as clients, and I can tell you that they all envy the Glazer-Kennedy results. If we compare math, they are stunned. But there are reasons. And a big one is our intention.
 I don’t think most salespeople expect to “get the check” every time out. They expect to be put off, expect stalls, expect multiple meetings and presentations to be necessary, generally expect NOT to get successful results—and more often than not, they get what they expect. Many salespeople even lower their own expectations in advance as a perverse means of feeling better about their results.
 I have been in those selling situations myself and with others, observed them making excuses in advance for poor performance, and work very hard to stop myself from doing so. Even when going into “hostile territory” or difficult selling situations, I always figure out strategy I can have confidence in, and go in expecting to win and win big.
 I prefer, and consistently stick to, working with entrepreneurial clients. But in this case that I will tell you about, I was referred to a Fortune 500 corporation, to discuss taking on a complex advertising project for them. I was told by the executive who brought me in that the CEO, his V.P. of Marketing, and his ad agency folk who would be there all thought my kind of direct-response marketing was voodoo. I was told the CEO would never agree to my standard compensation, which adds royalties tied to results on top of fees. Frankly, most of the time I’m aware of such an unfriendly, ill- prepared environment, I simply refuse to go; I fortunately no longer need to try and convert the ignorant. But in this case, for several compelling reasons, I went. I could have gone in accepting the executive’s cautions and either compromised my presentation and compensation demands, or braced myself for failure. I did neither. I did my homework, researched the CEO’s

-----

## background, the company’s situation, its competition, and went in with strategy and information I felt would be compelling. And I walked out with a $100,000.00 retainer. I intended nothing less.
 Expectations and intentions can impact entire organizations’ results too. I once consulted with an industrial company with a sales force accustomed to six-to-eight month sales cycles, multiple meetings before closing a sale, and dealing with decisions by committees. They refused to hear the message that their extended sales cycle was the result of their own expectations. About a year later I had the opportunity to consult with their chief competitor, a company half their size, experiencing the exact same frustrations, but blessed with a relatively open-minded president and sales team. We designed a radically different “top-down” marketing strategy targeting the CEOs of their prospect companies, intended to go from zero to a closed sale in a maximum of three meetings, over just three months. In just three years, this company surpassed its previously larger competitor in sales and size, averaging only 48 days from first contact to contract with new accounts.
 My speaking colleague Mike Vance, a former close working associate of Walt Disney, tells of consulting with a company, asking the CEO to name his most vexing problem, getting the answer, then asking: “Who’s working on solving it?”
 “No one, ”answered the CEO, “because it cannot be solved.” Unfortunately that doesn’t just describe CEO behavior. It describes “stuck” sales managers and salespeople too.
 Here’s what I’ve come to devoutly believe: a marketing and selling system or process can be devised to achieve virtually any desired result or expectation. You start with the way you want things to occur, then work backward to put in place whatever is necessary to make it so.

# Dan Kennedy’s #6 No B.S. Truth About Selling

-----

## Super-successful salespeople expect successful results.
 Many people respond to an unsuccessful effort by saying, “I didn’t expect that to happen anyway.” I say, “Then why did you waste any effort on it? If you don’t honestly expect success today, why not just roll over and go back to sleep?”
 But let’s be clear about this: I’m not talking about groundless, unreasonable expectations built out of “positive thinking” and nothing else. I’m talking about expecting success because you’ve created reasons to expect success.
 Here’s how I approach a selling or negotiating situation. First, I anticipate the worst—and carefully think through the ways that I may be able to counter or overcome the predictable, possible obstacles. Then, I expect the best. Often I visualize the entire process, rehearsing the entire dialogue in my head once, twice, even several times before actually proceeding with the meeting. I sell myself on the likelihood of getting what I want. And I believe this to be a vitally important sale to make. I’ve always done my best in selling, person to person or to groups, when I could make the actual selling experience déjà vu. By that I mean, it was constructed in my mind and on paper in advance, with component parts from previous successful selling experiences; assembled into a complete mental movie; played over and over again until existing as clear expectation; then when actually experienced, it’s déjà vu. These self-management techniques are from the aforementioned Dr. Maxwell Maltz’ famous Psycho-Cybernetics.
 In contrast, I find too many sales professionals just jumping into selling situations thoughtlessly, recklessly, ill-prepared, unrehearsed, with no right to reasonably expect great results. For example, I have clients who sell by tele-seminars who just show up to the call and “wing it.” If I’m selling, I never do such an irresponsible thing. In fact, I write the entire teleseminar out on paper as a script. Edit it. Re-write it. Deliver it mentally before actually.
 I have long used the same process for important selling situations. As example, when I set out to sell a division of one of my companies to a competitor, I used this process. I mention this example because it involved difficult obstacles and circumstances. The business I wanted to divest was troubled and that was no secret. There was the reasonable possibility the

-----

## competitor could wait patiently and let us disappear from his landscape, without giving us a penny. Our technology was antiquated. And I had no significant flexibility in price or terms; there was a number I had to have, and I had to be paid immediately.
 I thought through all the reasons it made good sense for them to accept the proposition—from their point of view. I thought through the possible reasons not to do the deal, and developed answers to them. I played out the entire meeting in my imagination, what Dr. Maltz terms the “Theater of Your Mind.” By the time I sat down with them in the first meeting I had every expectation of successfully consummating the deal. In fact, I was a little surprised when I walked out without a definite yes and had to wait a couple of weeks to complete the transaction. However, in the selling of companies, two weeks from zero to finish line is breakneck speed.
 Expectation is a powerful force. This concept is described by Napoleon Hill in his book Think and Grow Rich: “Whatever the mind of man can conceive and believe, it can achieve.” (Emphasis is mine.) “Believe” is the key word in this equation. You have to believe your proposition before anyone else will. You have to believe, with reason, that you will secure acceptance now, not later. And I am convinced that when your belief reaches 100%, you are guaranteed acceptance by the other person—the customer, client, whomever.
 Persuasion involves transferring your feelings onto the other person. If you “secretly” feel—

 • I’m not very good at persuading others
 • He’s too smart to fall for this . . . he’ll never go for this
 • He’s a much better, much more experienced negotiator
 • I wish this problem didn’t exist with this deal
 • I hope he hasn’t gotten a quote from XYZ, too; I can’t beat their prices then you’ll “transmit” those feelings to the other person, and it could affect the response. He may become uncomfortable, hesitant, insecure, and reluctant to proceed. And he may not consciously know why either, saying, “It’s just a feeling” or offering a vague justification for delay.
 On the other hand, when you do feel that the proposition is at least as good for the other party as it is for you, when you feel that the other person would be smart to say yes and stupid to say no, when you feel that you have something to offer that is better than anything available from any other

-----

## source, and when you feel that you are as good at communicating all of that as anyone could possibly be—you transfer those feelings, too. When you genuinely expect favorable and immediate response, you communicate that expectation.
 There are many professional salespeople with tremendous ability, extensive knowledge of their products, good selling skills, comprehensive training and education, and excellent opportunities who fail miserably, repetitively. Why? There is just one ingredient missing in their situation: conviction—the belief in themselves and their proposition, the expectation of successful outcome.
 Unfortunately, the experience of recession—worsened by media hype and political posturing and misery-loves-company conversation— convinced a great many business owners and sales professionals to lower and shrink their expectations about what they could sell at what prices, to whom, how quickly. They carry those pre-set expectations with them into every selling situation, regardless of the individual prospect’s situation or the changes in the economy. At the time you read this book, the expectations of price resistance and buying resistance from all customers may very well be greater and more controlling in most salespeople’s minds than at any time since the Depression of the 1930s.
 Even at the deepest point of this current or most recent recession, such expectations were not warranted by facts, especially if the salesperson practiced sound strategies for choosing good prospects (discussed later in this book). People bought and made immediate buying decisions—even at premium prices—every single day. In fact, the very day the stock market crashed below 8,000 the first time in this recession, a friend of mine and I dined at Ill Molino, a breathtakingly expensive restaurant. Every table was full. Our waiter showed no hesitation whatsoever in offering us pricey, extra appetizers, exotic cheeses, top-priced liquor. No one there decided there was no point in opening that night or no point in even trying to sell the most extravagant extras, and there was clear expectation of acceptance—they brought the goodies to the table and asked for the sale simultaneously. I was impressed by what I saw them doing, and at how successful they were at transforming the attitude of those entering, from shell-shocked, anxious, beaten (and no doubt resistant to spending) to upbeat, energized, involved, and happy to spend.

-----

## In The New Economy, my expectation is for the expectations of those selling goods, services, and, preferably, experiences to matter more than ever before. New Economy Customers will have come through a series of experiences and a period of time that has damaged their willingness to trust anyone or anything, dampened their optimism, and made them more circumspect. Early in 2009, ten years of accumulated stock market gains were wiped out in fewer than 30 days. The national debt was either doubled or tripled, depending on what you want to include or leave off-books, virtually overnight. Institutions viewed as rocksold, like America’s biggest banks, its auto-makers, blue chip corporations, were revealed as weak, vulnerable, and deceptive phantoms. Consumers and business owners alike have been shaken to their core. Even as a strong, albeit strong in different ways, New Economy replaces the old, the emotional and psychological scars will not easily or quickly heal and disappear. The New Economy Customer will need to borrow strength, confidence, and certainty via transference of feeling from those who sell to him, those he chooses to buy from.

-----