##### and systematic way, creating the right perception to your target audience that you are the “goto perosn” in whatever it is you do.
 If you are like many, you may be hesitant to have the spotlight shine upon you. However, if you want to sell to the affluent, there is no way around it—you have to be seen as the indisputable Authority. For that to happen, you must take the reins and deliberately create your Authority position, because no one else is going to do it for you.
 Figuratively speaking, when you spot a beautiful crown sitting on the sidewalk, you need to have the tenacity to pick that crown up, dust it off, and squarely place it on top of your head. If you wait for someone else to crown you king or queen, you’ll be waiting forever!
 Unfortunately for many, the way we were raised as children left us timid about claiming our own Authority position. When you were a child, your mother might have urged you to be humble. Don’t be a know-it-all. Don’t showboat. Don’t brag. Drawing attention to yourself was implicitly discouraged—which is why most people think it’s unbecoming to want the spotlight shined on them. We’ve been programmed against self-promotion. Also, many people fear promoting themselves as an expert, then hearing people shout, “Imposter!”
 This stems from a lack of self-confidence. A doctor may have a medical degree and ten years of experience in his own practice, but still think to himself, “What do I really know anyway?” Many think, “If I shine this Authority spotlight on myself, then someone, whether it’s my competitor or a stranger down the street, may find out I don’t know all the things I purport to know. I could be found to be an imposter.” This is the destructive narrative that many people tell themselves. This is why some people are reluctant to pursue the path of Authority Marketing. I’ve found that those who do intently pursue it are the most ambitious in their industry. In most cases, they’re the ones who are already successful. The reason they’re already successful is because they’ve shelved any doubts they had about being the center of attention. Their motivation for being the center of attention is not to feed their ego, but to grow their business.

 Accelerate Trust in the Affluent Market Using the ACE Formula What do we mean by “Authority?”


-----

##### Authority occurs when you combine standout, trustworthy expertise in his or her field with the high visibility you might associate with a celebrity. When this happens, the expert’s name becomes synonymous with their field, which naturally provides an incalculable advantage over the competition.
 This advantage is critical in your effort to win over the affluent audience, and the blueprint for building it is straightforward:


##### Authority = Expertise × Celebrity


##### People Buy from People, Not Corporations To begin, we’ll discuss the “A” in the ACE formula, which stands for “Authority.” Everyone understands the value of having a visible, respected, corporate brand, but few understand the power of a personal brand.
 Most entrepreneurs launch a business, then channel their focus on building visibility and equity for their corporate logo and name, whether it be through high-end graphic design, expensive advertising campaigns, a dominant social media presence, or public relations. When you do that, you’re playing against some of the biggest brands in the world. Competing brands may have a multi-decade head start in terms of awareness and a marketing budget that dwarfs yours.
 Authority levels the playing field. By focusing your attention on your Authority, you essentially become your own individual brand. In an era of increasing skepticism toward large corporate brands, the more accessible “personal brand” serves to accelerate the speed of trust with your target customer.
 This is true even in big business. The third largest company in the world is Berkshire Hathaway, but people aren’t buying from Berkshire Hathaway. They are buying Warren Buffett. Apple became a technology giant, in part, because people felt a connection with Steve Jobs. People buy Richard Branson of Virgin all the time.
 The company is far bigger than the person, but people buy from people, regardless of the industry or size of the business. So, one of the best things a


-----

##### company can do, no matter their size, is to invest in building the individual Authority of its figurehead.
 The C in ACE stands for “celebrity.” Across socioeconomic classes, there is a shared sense of wonder toward celebrities. People will often define professional accomplishments through their connections with famous individuals. Given the choice, everyone would choose to work with one. For example, if you’re looking for a dentist, would you rather have the locally well-known celebrity dentist, who has written a book and makes regular TV appearances giving advice on how to keep your smile healthy? Or would you choose the ho-hum, nondescript dentist? Even for a question as simple as “Which dental provider should I choose,” the affluent will put their family under the care of the celebrity because they consider him or her to be the Authority.
 The E in ACE stands for “expert.” Chances are you are already an expert in your field. However, since you’re reading this book, the affluent audience you are trying to attract doesn’t necessarily know it yet.
 Every facet of a company’s marketing should work to build Authority, celebrity, and expertise. That is who the affluent want to work with; that is who they trust. If the prospect doesn’t trust you, they will not buy from you. Every company trying to sell a product or service has to overcome the hurdle that is the trust barrier. The prospect must have enough trust in the company that they will deliver as promised. The level of trust you need to convey to overcome the trust barrier will fluctuate depending on what you are selling. For example, buying an apple from a grocery store is very different from buying a new home, a new car, or deciding who will perform your heart surgery. Authority accelerates trust. When you have Authority, people give you the benefit of the doubt. People tend to say, “Well, he wrote the book on it. Of course, he knows what he’s talking about.” Or, “She’s on TV every week. She must be good.” It’s about creating the right perception so that people will buy. By building your Authority through third-party affirmation of your skills, you create the right perception. The more Authority you have, the less of a trust barrier there is to overcome.

 What Should Your Book Be About?


-----

##### It doesn’t matter what industry you’re in. There have been books published for just about every industry—doctors, dentists, chiropractors, financial advisors, real estate professionals, developers, restaurant owners, business owners. It all goes back to the same thing. Everyone wants to work with the go-to person. Everyone has to overcome a threshold of trust. And the more Authority you have, the quicker you accelerate trust and the quicker you make the sale. Keeping in mind that affluent people value books, a book is an objectively powerful medium that will elevate your credibility and get you noticed by that audience. Not to mention, affluent people tend to stay more informed than non-affluent people. Again, given a choice between a guy nobody’s ever heard of and a professional who has written five books and been on TV, a reasonable person will choose the professional who wrote five books.
 Your job here is not to become a celebrity the likes of Paris Hilton or Kim Kardashian. Rather, it is to become the Authority, celebrity, and expert exclusively in the eyes of the people who can and will give you money. Cultivating the image of Authority to someone who can’t do business with you is a waste of resources and effort.
 Therefore, when it comes to building your Authority, you must narrow your focus specifically to those you can do business with and profit from. The more you sharpen your target demographic, the more you can tailor your brand image to appeal to that audience, becoming the exact professional they’re looking to work with. As the saying goes, your riches are in your niches, which is why I advise you to write a book that your ideal customer will see and immediately think, “This book was written just for me.”
 Too often, authors think their book can appeal to absolutely everyone, that there isn’t a single person who wouldn’t benefit from reading it. Thinking this way and writing a book this way will NOT help you reach an affluent target audience. First of all, it’s impossible to appeal to everyone. On top of that, such a book would be just plain vanilla—because in reality, a book that appeals to everyone, appeals to no one in particular. When writing your book, you can’t be the equivalent of store-bought, generic vanilla ice cream. You’ve got to be the hand-scooped, artisan-crafted, award-winning gelato that customers queue around the block for. For


-----

##### affluent people who are very in tune with the quality of service they’re after, they’re looking for the solution that screams, “This was made for me.”

 How to Leverage the Seven Pillars of Authority Marketing to Reach
 the Affluent Market If you want your message to reach the affluent, there has never been a more pressing time to get your Authority position established. In this day and age of online discoverability, the longer you postpone Authority-building, the further you fall behind your competitors. In our current environment, the first impression most people will have of you and your brand won’t happen in person or even over the phone—it will happen online, via page one of Google, your website, and social media channels. Think about it. Even if you are meeting someone for coffee or have a phone consultation scheduled, what do you do before meeting them? If you are like me, and many people I know, you’re scrolling through Google results for that person’s name. So, when you meet with people, expect that a first impression has already been established. As such, your degrees on the wall and years of hard-earned experience are no longer enough with the affluent audience. The good news is you can intentionally and strategically create an Authority Marketing blueprint and implement it to build your Authority, for both your digital footprint and tangible presence.
 There are seven components and practices used to build Authority before your target audience—these are known as the Seven Pillars of Authority Marketing, and they are the bedrock of your Authority Marketing blueprint.

 1. Branding and Omnipresence As discussed earlier, people are more drawn to individuals than impersonal corporate brands. Therefore, you need to create a distinct personal brand, every bit as recognizable and consistent as a corporate brand—but centered around you, rather than a business entity.
 Omnipresence means being everywhere. So, when your affluent prospect sees you, the kind of responses you want to hear are: “I feel like I’ve heard your name before. I feel like everywhere I go, I read something about you or I hear somebody talking about you.” Love him or hate him,


-----

##### President Donald Trump is a suitable example of omnipresence. Plenty of other billionaires ran for president before him, but none of them succeeded. Because of Trump’s book, speaking engagements, the fact that he was always on TV, the radio, and hosting The Apprentice—everywhere you went, you would see him. In the business sphere, you don’t need to go to that extreme. You don’t need to be “everywhere” in the truest sense of the word. However, you do want to be everywhere your target audience is looking. For example, if you are trying to build the most profitable orthodontist practice in Cleveland, Ohio, you might look at how you can be omnipresent to mothers between the age of 30 and 50, with school-age children, who live in Cleveland, Ohio.

 2. Content Marketing Content marketing involves the prodigious publication of valuable content that your target audience would want to consume. The ultimate form of content marketing is writing a book. However, content marketing also entails white papers, special reports, newsletters, teleseminars, webinars, blogs, podcasts, and so on. This works well because instead of explicitly saying “Buy from me” over and over, you provide valuable information to your target customer. Your first touch point with a potential lead is delivering value in the form of thoughtfully produced content. You educate them on the topic they were inquiring about, so that they think to themselves, “Wow, she sure seems to know what she is talking about.”

 3. PR and Media PR and media involve appearances on TV and radio, in newspapers, magazines, and on blogs—among many others. It’s about raising your overall visibility with media, podcast, or print interviews. PR and media accomplish two things. They reinforce your Authority in the mind of the viewer, listener, or reader. When someone appears on a TV show or on the radio, the likely reason they’re a guest on that show is because they’ve been deemed an expert. If they weren’t an expert why would they have been invited on the show?
 PR and media also serve to perpetuate branding and omnipresence. One of the most common mistakes people make is believing that the media will


-----

##### come to them. They believe the media has an agenda to promote their business for them. This couldn’t be further from the truth. The media’s agenda is to create compelling stories that their viewers, listeners, or readers want to consume. You must become part and parcel to the compelling stories that media outlets want to tell, then they will want to feature you. When you offer to talk about your newly published book or give your expert opinion on a hot current event, this is a far easier way to get on TV or the radio than announcing that your company just hired 10 new people or is expanding into a new market.

 4. Speaking It’s one thing to be a subject matter expert who “wows” anyone they have a conversation with. It is something else altogether when you take those stories, passion, and knowledge, and broadcast them on stage to a large group of intent listeners. Speaking engagements lend a literal and figurative microphone to your stories and knowledge, allowing you to reach and impact a wider audience than you’d normally be able to. This is incredibly empowering—for both you and your audience members. When you share your thought leadership on stage (whether it be at a conference, event, or seminar), you are perceived as an Authority by your listeners. Going beyond perception, this conveys your Authority objectively; if you didn’t know what you were talking about, why in the world would the meeting planner have scheduled you to speak?
 More importantly, speaking to your target audience is among the best ways to generate new customers. It’s imperative to make the distinction here that speaking isn’t just about trying to land a big paycheck. You don’t speak for the sake of speaker fees. You speak for the sake of putting yourself in front of the right people, who have the capacity to do business with you. That is the value of speaking engagements. For example, if a meeting planner calls and asks me to speak to a group of elementary teachers, that would be a hard sell on their part, because elementary teachers are not my audience. However, if I were asked to speak to a group of CEOs about Authority Marketing, that is my audience and that speaking engagement would have much higher value to me. The point here is that no


-----

##### matter what business you’re in, if you are asked to speak to an audience of your target customers, then the paycheck is largely immaterial.
 When you speak, if you’re resonating with your audience, you’ll have a line of people in the back of the room who want to do business with you as soon as you step off the stage. If you’ve written a book, and someone sees you autographing books and taking pictures with people in the back of the room, it establishes your Authority and credibility in their eyes.

 5. Events Events can be anything from putting on conferences, seminars, and boot camps to customer appreciation events. Using Dan Kennedy as an example, he holds two events per year through No B.S. Inner Circle (www.nobsinnercircle.com), with Dan as the keynote speaker. Hundreds of people travel thousands of miles, from countries all around the world, to come to hear him speak. The event alone creates a feeling of Authority, but when someone gets on a plane and travels to come to see you, that is powerful demonstration of your Authority position.
 Customer appreciation events, where you invite customers to bring their friends, relatives, and neighbors to come engage with and spend time with you, can be leveraged to build Authority. Subliminally, they build Authority in the minds of those who made the trip.
 This can be any event. For a restaurant owner or chef, it could be a cooking class. People will come to learn from you because your skill and reputation precede you. Or, if they come to your dinner seminar to learn about planning for retirement, it’s because you know more about the topic than they do, which conveys Authority. If you pull people’s attention away from their day-to-day to come to you and give you their undivided attention, whether it’s for days or just hours and minutes, you succeed in building your Authority.
 The first five pillars drive and enhance the last two pillars.

 6. Referral Marketing A good barometer to gauge the level of Authority you’ve attained is whether customers tell their friends and family about you. If you’re good, your customers will tell their friends about you. If you’re horrible, your


-----