#### ideas, opinions, and advice, like being asked for their help and influence. Often, you even get more than you ask for! There’s another author who called up Trump’s office “cold” and asked to have The Donald look at his book manuscript and give him a quote. Trump gave him a quote and an entire extra chapter to add to the book, a lot of marketing muscle for the book.
 With that in mind, I’d like to ask YOU to promote this book. Go to www.NoBSBooks.com and click on “viral.” There, you’ll find some ready- to-use e-mails you can forward, free articles you can copy and send, all sorts of nifty goodies you can give to your entrepreneur friends. And if you happen to be an association executive or corporate big dog or somebody else with a big list of businesspeople who know you and respect you, I’d be happy to hear from you personally, and we can figure out something— maybe a special free tele-seminar you gift to everybody, for example. I’m game. Send me a fax with some details at 602-269-3113. (Please be patient. It might be two to three weeks before I can respond.)
 See, I asked. Of course, it helps to be able to give to get, sometimes in advance of the asking, or least reciprocate to get, and to offer reciprocation. It’s not essential, but it is helpful. If you’re really, really perceptive you’ll realize how I’ve used this book, done things within this book, to support my asking for assistance promoting the book. If you figure it out, it’s a secret not limited to authors and books. Any business owner could use the same strategy. Every business owner has media: customer newsletter, bags and box lids, in-store signage, window displays, and more. Every business owner has basis for co-operating with others.
 Wealth is more readily attracted through co-operation than independent action. Strategic alliances are the new world order in The New Economy. As costs of acquisition—of leads, of customers, of information, of resources —have risen, sharing of those assets and resources has grown evermore important. Timidity about proposing such alliances imposes severe handicap. I have improved my bank balance a great deal, often, with conversations I initiate, beginning with “You know, we should do something together.”



-----

## Wealth Magnet 15

 Domino Opportunity

#### A lot of entrepreneurs get gifted with a lot of opportunity. It’s just not lack or shortage of opportunity that explains anybody’s lack of wealth.
 Phil McGraw was a family therapist who disliked private practice, dabbled in speaking, the personal growth seminar business, corporate consulting on human resources matters, and even consulting with lawyers on jury selection and witness preparation. He was handed the gift of consulting with the lawyers hired to defend Oprah Winfrey when she was sued over her negative remarks about beef. Lots of consultants would have collected a fat fee and an autographed photo and been happy to get them, and that would be that. Dr. Phil became Dr. Phil by dominoing that opportunity .
 You may never get such a giant and obvious opportunity. But you most certainly do get many opportunities, day in, day out, that you fail to domino.

-----

#### As a personal example, a trade journal for attorneys, Pennsylvania Lawyer, published a chapter from my No B.S. Time Management book as an article. I immediately went into the domino-the-opportunity mode: A copy of article and book sent to the other 49 states’ law journals, to try and get published, to promote my books, in those magazines; a copy of the article to several clients who market to lawyers, run seminars for lawyers, etc., with encouragement to reprint the article and distribute it to their customers. Sure, it’s a small thing. But you sell 50,000 books one book at a time. So it’s all about small things multiplied, as is most marketing and promotion. So one article dominoed into 5 or 8 or 20 is a small thing multiplied equaling a big thing. Often, when one of my books is released, we organize a teleseminar with me, or an online video program with me, and typically get from 5,000 to 15,000 people to attend. We create that opportunity and leverage it with a vast network of other authors, publishers, business coaches, and consultants and others, so that the 5,000 comes from 500 sources. More importantly, we domino this opportunity before, during, and after, with a complex, multistep, multi-media marketing campaign for the book and for membership in Glazer-Kennedy Insider’s Circle™.
 This is an attitude, an approach that those adept at wealth attraction cultivate in themselves, so the domino-opportunity behavior becomes second nature, so every opportunity gets dominoed. It’s also something that feeds on itself, as one opportunity dominoed tends to bring other opportunities. Momentum occurs. This is why Ken Kragen, a master publicist and promoter, who launched a number of entertainers’ careers, including Kenny Rogers, always strived to create a chain of three linked events occurring in quick succession, rather than one publicity event; to go beyond getting attention, and creating momentum .
 Just as it is more difficult to attract customers in The New Economy, as they strive to be more thoughtful and prudent about their spending, it is harder than ever to get attention and hold it for any length of time. A media environment once made up of three TV networks, evening news, newspapers, and a few weekly magazines has first, fragmented with hundreds of cable stations and 24/7 news and news-talk, then second, exploded online with thousands of options, blogs, websites, YouTube, Facebook, and on and on. Migration occurs backwards from new media to old media. One of the weeks I was working on this chapter, a homemade video of a wedding bride and escort and entire group of family and friends

-----

#### dancing down the aisle to hiphop music made its way to YouTube, and from there to cable and network TV, its participants twice brought “live” to the Today Show, and it topped five-million viewers on YouTube—but it was over, gone, and forgotten in five days. If it had been fabricated for commercial purposes, the means of dominoing the opportunity existed. But if the entrepreneur didn’t have a plan and didn’t act decisively, quickly, and expansively to domino that opportunity, it would be wasted. Domino or disappear, that’s the way it is these days.



-----

## Wealth Magnet 16

 Passion

#### T here’s a whole lot of metaphysical foolishness, in books, CDs, seminars, pushing the simplistic premise: do what you love to do and money will follow. Now there is a giant, steaming, stinking pile of b.s.! Sure, happy accidents happen, but do you want to wager your future on freak incidents?
 I like to lie in a hammock. I like to read. Eat pizza. Watch football. I have yet to figure out how to get people to line up and pay to watch me do that. Doesn’t matter how much I enjoy those things. My enjoyment can multiply, the money won’t.
 This idea that you can do what you like, or feel most passionately about and be assured of attracting wealth is silly and childish. Appealing, certainly. But silly and childish. At some point we must outgrow childish things. One of my earliest mentors taught me that maturity meant, in part, that you stopped letting your “wants” control you. In fact, our wants are often in conflict and some must be given priority over others. I have a passionate love for carb-loaded Mexican food, including “junk” Mexican

-----

#### food from Taco Bell[®], but I am a non-insulin-dependent diabetic, I control my disease with diet, nutritional supplements, and fitness, and I have a passionate interest in driving professionally in harness races, which requires me to have my diabetes under control, and I have a strong interest in a long life, too. Mature choices must be made. Same principle applies to attracting wealth. If you indulge wants in conflict with wealth attraction, you trade away wealth for fulfillment of those wants.
 If you don’t get it through inheritance, marrying into it, or random luck, most wealth comes through businesses, and businesses must be market driven. Not personal joy driven. Market driven. The list of people who got out of bed this morning hoping you will have passion and joy today is probably short. But the lists of people who get out of bed in the morning with diseases they desperately want cures for, problems they urgently seek solutions for, hopes and dreams they need help fulfilling, conveniences they’d welcome if offered—those lists are long. If you want to attract maximum wealth with minimum effort in minimum time, here’s the formula: find such a list for which you can engineer your own superior answer.
 You do want to avoid drudgery. No one can maintain selfmotivation and productivity very long when engaged in activities they find mind-numbing or onerous, or dealing with people they despise, or doing work they find unfulfilling, or selling things they do not believe in. This is a certain path to poverty. But, on the other hand, only doing what you like with no regard to market demand is just as certain a path to poverty.
 Truth is, you rarely get all the results you want only from activities and processes you prefer. Maturity involves opting for desirable results rather than pleasing activities .
 There’s also a popular metaphysical idea—don’t pursue money, pursue passion. Pfui. I’m a writer, and I like Mark Twain’s quote: “No one but a blockhead writes but for money.” I hear people say they like their work so much they’d do it even if they weren’t being paid. I think that’s frightening and dangerous. Someone in business needs to think in a businesslike way. Why would I write just to write? I write for an audience who will pay money. Otherwise, it’s like being the tree that falls in the distant, unpopulated forest, heard or noticed by no one. What’s the point?
 So, let’s try re-arranging some items. In no particular order:

-----

#### The very unbusinesslike arrangement would be: passion, purpose, market, market demand, money. Pursue your passion, indulge your purpose or mission with no regard for a market or market demand, and hope to attract wealth. I again say to you: Hope is not a strategy.
 The business arrangement would be: market, market demand, purpose, passion, money. Identify a viable, preferably under-served market, determine market demand (what it wants most and will pay for), then align your purpose, and do something for the market that you can feel passionately about.