# CHAPTER 4

STRATEGY 4 AVOID CONTAMINATION

## In just about every sales organization lurk “grizzled veterans” who, through a combination of longevity, seniority, and accumulated customers or clients, manage to earn reasonably good livings even though they are poor salespeople. These hangers-on make money in spite of their many bad habits. These people are extremely dangerous to any enthusiastic salesperson, but especially to any new salesperson for a number of reasons:

 • They are not fully aware of all their own counter-productive attitudes and habits, and they are capable of unintentionally contaminating others.

 • They resent hotshots who might make them look lazy, ineffective, or over-the-hill and will consciously and subconsciously do things to put the over-achiever in his place. The person who actively aspires to top performance, who displays initiative, drive, and determination, or who challenges the status quo with new and different ways of doing things is their enemy—and they will do whatever they can to directly discourage him and, behind his back, undermine him.

 • They do not keep up-to-date and informed on the latest sales techniques and product information, so they are likely to be sources of outdated or inaccurate information even though they sound authoritative and knowledgeable.

 • They often have very poor personal habits, including drinking at lunch and after work on a daily basis, using foul language, and sometimes even poor personal hygiene.

 • They are cynical about people. They often call customers or clients “marks,” “pigeons,” and other derogatory names. You cannot succeed in selling in a big way if you are cynical about people or about your clientele. (Note that it’s okay to be realistic, just not cynical; there is a difference.)

-----

## • They are complainers and blamers—that’s how they excuse their own mediocrity. In order to succeed in selling, you must take full responsibility for every factor in the process. These people are particularly hazardous during difficult economic times, during times of upheaval or change, or during emergence of this or any subsequent New Economy, because they view and talk about all change as adversity and obstacle—never as opportunity. Every business, every company, every organization has at least a few of these types. You will find them on the showroom floor at the car dealership, gathered around the coffee machine in the real estate office, in the hall, or at the sales meeting. You must not let these people contaminate you! They are toxic.
 Very recently, I worked with a client stuck with three veteran salespeople stubbornly unwilling to make outbound telephone calls generated by the advertising I’d developed. They insisted these were poor quality leads, “mooches” as they put it, who had requested free information and product samples from the ads but had no real interest in the high-priced product being sold. At my urging, he hired three new, additional salespeople just to follow up on these leads—but he put them in the same office as the first two. In less than two weeks, the old veterans ruined the new ones. The new reps had a brief, initial flurry of success, then their results diminished. Later, we again got three new salespeople installed and safely isolated in a distant building, and they produced millions of dollars of business from those “mooches.” Old dogs who refuse to learn new tricks should never be permitted to raise puppies.

-----

# How to Cheat on Your Expense Account and
 Other “Lessons” from the Grizzled Old Pro

## Early in my selling career, a manager flew in to work with me in my territory. He and I traveled together for a week. He taught me several creative ways to cheat on my expense account and how to make sales calls by phone and write them up as if they were made in person. He taught me virtually nothing about selling. He was a great “pal.” He had a terrific if slightly bizarre sense of humor, and he was making reasonably good money. But he had nothing to offer that would help me achieve my goals.
 Shortly after being hired, I went to Chicago to work the company’s exhibit booth in the Chicago Gift Show. This is a huge trade show, where tens of thousands of gift shop owners and chain store buyers come in search of new, different, and sellable merchandise. I was excited about being there and eager to write a lot of business with the people attending from my territory. Almost instantly the other sales pros ganged up on me, saying things like, “Take it easy—we’re gonna be here for four long days”; “Don’t be too aggressive—it looks bad”; “Most of these people are just lookers, not buyers, anyway”; “Nobody sells much at these shows—we’re here to get leads.”
 I ignored the whole bunch of them and, much to their irritation, wrote thousands of dollars of orders during the show. No huge amount—nothing to write home about—but it was more than what five of the others (who had at least six years’ more experience than I did) made.
 Those experiences taught me that it was generally unwise to listen to advice, complaints, and comments of others just because they were older or more experienced. Age is not necessarily equivalent to wisdom. Experience does not always teach much. In fact, since most people stop learning very early in their careers, you are very likely to encounter the person who has one year’s experience 30 times rather than 30 years of experience.

-----

# Dan Kennedy’s #3 No B.S. Truth About Selling

## It’s a good idea to learn from other people’s experience, but usually with this caveat: seek out and learn from those with experience who
 are at the top of their game.
 You must exercise great care in selecting those who are permitted to advise and influence you. Falling under the influence of someone headed nowhere will generally lead you to the same destination!
 These toxic associations must be avoided at all costs. On the other hand, association with success-minded, progressive individuals engaged in improving their knowledge and skills in sales, marketing, and other business disciplines is well worth the search to find it or effort invested in creating it. Along these lines, I have a “commercial” recommendation: I’m pleased to tell you that we have local Glazer-Kennedy Insider’s Circle[™] Chapters meeting regularly in over 150 towns and cities throughout the United States and Canada, as well as Dan Kennedy Study/ Mastermind Groups in most of those areas. They are facilitated by trained, certified, and very capable Independent Business Advisors, and the local entrepreneurs, business owners, selfemployed professionals, and sales professionals participating are people you will benefit from hanging out with. For information and, in most areas, a free guest pass to attend a Chapter meeting, visit the Directory of Certified No B.S. Business Advisors and Chapters at www.DanKennedy.com.
 There is probably no profession other than selling where mental attitude is as important, with the possible sharing with professional sports. The late W. Clement Stone, self-made billionaire, who began as a star insurance sales pro and taught tens of thousands of others how to excel in that field while building the largest independent insurance sales organization of its time, out of the depths of the Great Depression, summed it up this way:

-----

## “The sale is contingent on the attitude of the salesperson, not the prospect.” It is for that reason that you must militantly protect your mental attitude from contamination. Your success will be contingent on your mental attitude, not the attitude of your customers or clients.
 Oh, and incidentally, Stone didn’t say “The sale is contingent upon the attitude of the salesperson, not the prospect—unless times are tough, unless there’s recession, unless there’s a tough competitor in the game, unless . . . .” No weasel words, no escape clause here.

-----