## How a Small University

 Went from Stodgy to Spectacular using Wealth
 Attraction Magnets

#### I am pleased to hold a position on the advisory board of the School of Communication at High Point University. Its president, Dr. Nido R. Qubein, has been a friend for many years, has, at my invitation, addressed Glazer- Kennedy Insider’s Circle[™] events and conferences, and we have done business together on occasion over the years. His life is a classic American success story, having raised himself from empty-pockets immigrant with nominal grasp of the English language to highly paid professional speaker, sought-after consultant, member of boards of companies like Great Harvest Bread Company and La-Z-Boy, founder of a bank, and philanthropist. But nothing on his resume even approaches the magnitude of all he has accomplished at dizzying speed in the total transformation of High Point University. To protect him from the wrath of his academic peers, let me quickly say he would not approve of my “stodgy to spectacular” description. It is mine and mine alone. It is accurate. In short order, as this

-----

#### chapter will partially describe, he has re-made the university in every imaginable and many unimaginable ways. If the Disney Imagineers were to create a college, they couldn’t top this.
 Before you hear from Donald Scarborough, Ed.D., Vice-President for Institutional Advancement at High Point University, I have just a few things I want to say.
 I urge, urge, urge visiting HighPoint.edu to see as much as can be seen of this amazing place online. If your travels take you anywhere near High Point, North Carolina, go in person, tour, observe. Nothing read or seen at distance can do this remarkable place justice. Beyond being an outstanding academic institution, it is a living, breathing, thriving demonstration of wealth attraction. It will inspire you to create more exceptional experiences for your own clientele—and show you how to do it. As you will soon discover, this university has its own Director of WOW!, its own concierge service, and, of course, its own Starbucks. Dig deeper, though, and you will discover an attention to microdetail bordering on obsessive and a Disney- like creativity and flexibility and responsiveness you rarely find alive anywhere, let alone at a college. To that point, here’s a story from the book Insider Secrets To Delivering Red Carpet Service: The Celebrity Experience by Donna Cutting, from her visit to HPU:

 President Qubein has made it a habit to walk around the HPU campus with his leadership team on a regular basis. While on one of these walks, he noticed a path that students had made through the grass to get to one of the buildings instead of using the beautiful brick walkways that had been provided for them. He asked his maintenance team about it, and their response was that they had tried pleading, cajoling, erecting signs, everything they could think of to keep the students from walking on the grass—nothing had worked. “What ideas do you have?” they asked their new president. The answer he gave surprised them. “Get a bricklayer over here and make a new path over the one the students have made.” Nido realized that the students knew the path through the grass was the shortest distance from point A to point B. Of course they wanted to cut through the grass! So he took a cue from his customer. He began to look for other places where students had made their own paths to get where they were going, and he put brick walkways in those very spots.

-----

#### What do you think of that? I see my Wealth Magnet 17, See What Isn’t There, and Wealth Magnet 10, Do Something, in play. Welcome to The New Economy, where finding ways to respond to and enhance the customer experience whenever possible is paramount, and decisiveness and speed of equal criticality.
 You might think this contrary to my insistence that businesses be designed to serve their owners’ preferences. It is not. On things that really matter to you—say, hours worked or how you are accessible to customers, for example—you should seek ways to attract clientele who are not at odds with you, train customers to do business with you as you want them to, and offer compensating benefits you don’t mind giving. And business owners do routinely underestimate their own latitude in such matters. But something like the location of the brick paths has no real importance to Nido. Why be stubborn about it? Almost every other university president would be. The grounds crew was. Why not, instead, make changes that make customers happier? Leadership involves discretion; picking battles, not making everything a battle. And seizing opportunities. Most business owners are the opposite of Nido; they have their rule books in hand, heels dug in, eyes closed tight. They are all about keeping those darned customers off the grass! No sane businessperson believes the customer is always right, but we should be willing to admit that sometimes the customer has better ideas—and we should be out walking around looking for them .
 My own visits to HPU, my own walking around with Nido have revealed many situations quite similar to the brick paths, and a consistent way in which he responds to them—creatively.
 Now, for the rest of this story ...

## The Renaissance at High Point

By Donald A. Scarborough, Ed.D.

-----

#### During the fall semester of 2004, HPU’s president announced his retirement. The University had been established in 1924 and is located in High Point, North Carolina—“The Furniture Capital of the World.” Soon a search for a new leader began. Quickly the Search Committee turned to one of its own members, Dr. Nido R. Qubein. Dr. Qubein had a professional speaking schedule second to none, he consulted with numerous major national and international corporations, and he was the owner of several other companies while serving as a director on many others. After responding “no” on several occasions, he prayerfully considered the opportunity and resolved that it would a good time to pay back his adopted country and his alma mater for the success he had achieved. So, he decided to accept the role for a few years in order to get the University back on a sound footing—raise some money, organize the business functions, recruit a leadership team, etc. Little did he know that he would fall in love with the students, own the purpose, and adopt a mission to totally and completely rethink and retool High Point University.

### Wealth Magnets 2, 5, 10, 14, 17, 23 and 27

#### Dr. Qubein became HPU’s seventh president on January 1, 2005. He knew that the University needed a significant kick start. With strong confidence and exuberance, he set a bold fundraising goal of $10 million from friends and supporters of the University in his first month at work —it turned out to be $21 million in only 21 days on the job. The confidence and determination he displayed “infected” everyone he approached.