## Whether you use Takeaway Selling or not is a fundamental choice about how you are going to go through your career, what kind of experience it is going to be for you and for your customers or clients. Takeaway Selling actually is win-win. Clients feel good about being privileged, being special, being in an elite group, and if they get that feeling by doing business with you, then you are providing significant added value. You will have much more energy and enthusiasm, bring more creativity to your clients’ needs, and derive greater satisfaction from your daily experience if you are dealing with people who do feel privileged dealing with you!

# A Picture Is Worth a Thousand Words, and
 $237,000.00

## In lieu of a Field Trip and a Copywriting Corner this month, I instead bring you my complete interview with “the $250,000.00 photographer”—and then suggest your own field trip to his website.

 JOHN ZEULI photographs industry icons including a number of Forbes 400 CEOs and entrepreneurs, political leaders, authors, artists and other high profile individuals. That list includes Erin Brokovich, Bryan Moss (former chairman, Gulfstream), Robert Redford, Ellyn Burstyn, George Foreman, authors Patricia Cornwell, Pat Conroy, Paula Deen. His most elite program, “Legacy,” requires a $237,000.00 fee. An individual’s Legacy Exhibit includes the photography; 15 archival, museum-quality, framed prints; 7 handcrafted books featuring the photographs; a digital slide show; and high resolution digital file of all the photographs. Some clients invest in excess of $250,000.00. He

-----

## has offered to photograph The Million Dollar Dog, which would risk making her title literally accurate. He is based on Savannah, Georgia, the locale featured in the novel and movie Midnight in the Garden of Good and Evil, and provides a “Savannah experience” as one option for clients. You may look at John’s business at: www.JohnZeuliPhotography.com.
 His connection to me, from John: “I have studied your material off and on for years. I do much better financially when I have you in the ‘on’ position! Twenty some years ago I owned a jewelry store and I remember selling over $60,000.00 in one day using one of your strategies—and $60,000.00 was a lot back then. No doubt you saw your influence throughout my literature.” The Interview . . .
 DAN: I wonder about your advertised and imposed limitation of only working with seven individuals a year—and I’m considering such a thing for myself ... and of the category exclusivity you offer, only working with one individual in a given industry or profession. What leaps out of your material is what I call “manufactured differentiation.” I’d like you to comment on when and how you developed this position and why you find it persuasive with your clientele.
 JOHN: Only working with seven clients per year at the Legacy Level, and only one per industry or profession, is a very deliberate exclusivitydifferentiation. My experience is that extremely successful and high-profile individuals are competitive. They are keenly aware of what their peers are up to. They want to be first. Exclusive, special.
 DAN: If alert, people just got their price of admission to this interview back in spades in one sentence in that answer—it should leap out. The fees also leap out! Your Legacy package carries a $237,000.00 price tag. A lesser package is also offered at $57,000.00. The cynics might guess the $237,000.00 a red herring, to make $57,000.00 seem reasonable and attractive, and I hope you don’t mind me asking abut that. With either fee, most will assume your clientele is limited to only the Very Rich; what I identify in my Marketing to the Affluent book as

-----

## ULTRA-Affluent, and your prospective clients to be very limited in number. True or false? I’m guessing neither to be true—that your clientele comes from a broader range of affluence. Tell us what you’re willing to share about the types of clients you work with.
 JOHN: I am certainly expensive. Yes, the $237K makes the $57K seem affordable and reasonable, however the more expensive package is not a red herring—in the sense that this is where my future lies. When I authentically put it out there, I get response; if I never put it out there, it would never happen. My client base tends to start at affluent and go up to ultra-affluent. Not surprisingly, the more affluent the clients are, the easier and more fun they are to work with. If I lower my fee to help someone afford me, I inevitably “get bitten in the butt”—I encourage my wife to remind me to “just say no!” If I encounter someone solely price conscious, I refer them to another photographer. Better they go crazy than me.
 DAN: From a marketing standpoint, how did you build your business and your reputation? Were there big breakthroughs that catapulted you to this level? How have you secured these clients before you had many to provide referrals?
 JOHN: From studying your work, and from hard knocks, I realized that waiting to be discovered OR climbing up some ladder was a fool’s game. I used the express elevator to the top. For my business, high-profile individuals are the express elevator. I declared myself to be a high- profile photographer and sought out this niche. Initially, I approached high-profile people to be photographed for certain portrait exhibits. I did not charge. Before long they were referring peers to me who paid. And, as I featured more high-profile people on my website, other “regular” clients expected to pay more.
 DAN: As they say in the Guinness commercials, brilliant! The “created reason” to get to exactly the people you want to get to, without asking for business and clients out of the gate, is readily available in some variation to everybody, yet so few use it. Years ago, I

-----

## counseled a management/leadership trainer and consultant who wanted to build a local practice with corporations in his home city, to contact the 100 top CEO’s, to interview them for his forthcoming book on leadership. He easily entered doors that would otherwise have stayed sealed shut, he spent 30 to 90 minutes with each CEO, mostly listening, and it will be no surprise to you that his entire business was almost instantly built.
 It is obvious you don’t “sell pictures.” At least, I hope it’s obvious. So many make less than they could and struggle unnecessarily simply “things.” How would you describe what you do—and what your clients feel they are buying?
 JOHN: You are correct; I do NOT sell pictures, and I feel strongly about this. If that’s all they want, I’d rather they go elsewhere. Rather, I create extremely positive experiences and memories for individuals, couples, families, and organizations. While providing stellar images is critical, on many levels it is still an addendum to the experience. Through the experiences and resulting poignant images created, I’ve helped strengthen, nurture, and even heal relationships. This puts the fee in perspective, by the way—after all, what does a divorce cost? Being a catalyst to improving relationships is significant and priceless work, and frankly, I need to articulate this better in my literature.
 DAN: Your end comment demonstrates the importance of constantly re-thinking our businesses, re-evaluating positioning and presentations, and finding opportunities to be prodded by people who “get it” . . . my plug for participation in local Glazer-Kennedy Chapters, the Peak Performers group, coming to events. Back to the actual question, I think your firm position on not wanting people of a certain frame of mind about this as clients is very significant.
 As a final question, everybody will wonder about the impact of the economic mess on your business. Is there impact? Is it causing you to alter any marketing, pricing, or other aspect of your business?

-----

## JOHN: Yes, I’ve noticed impact with the economic downturn. While the ultra-affluent are still rich by my and by most standards, it’s all relative, subject to individual perception. If they feel fearful, they become cautious. Competition also matters more, and my competitors are not other photographers, but the other luxuries they might consider. My job, heightened at this time, is to convince them to purchase what I offer rather than a new luxury auto or another trip through Europe. If I’m changing anything, it’s in the search. There’s a sentence in one of Frank Herbert’s Dune novels: “Fortune changes hands in times of crisis.” My job is to find the new hands.

-----