##### wellness is explosive. While the total size estimates of this market are inexact, there is at least $4 trillion a year being spent, and for the next 7 to 12 years Boomers alone are expected to spend upwards of $1 trillion annually.
 Wellness tourism is a fast-growing segment of travel, with a shift from experiential to “transformative” vacations. The Four Seasons in Beverly Hills has Reiki therapists, crystal healers, and wellness rooms. The Ritz- Carlton in Beaver Creek, Colorado, offers Mountain Spa packages, wellness classes, and an oxygen bar. There is even “wellness real estate,” featuring homes built for healthy living. Wellness guru Deepak Chopra partnered with real estate developers in Miami to create oceanfront residences with “advanced body/mind purification systems that meet heightened standards for air and water quality … advanced technologies that continually monitor changes in the interior environment to promote your well-being.” These 3,600-square foot units start at $4.8 million.
 Marriage of tech and wellness is seen as a major future growth opportunity. Currently available apps can go so far as replicating an EKG, devices like FitBit and the Apple Watch lead this product category, and this is seen as a nascent industry in and of itself.
 The drivers for all of this start with Gen X’ers through Boomers and to Seniors.
 It is generally understood and accepted that “healthy” costs more—with food, home goods, living locations, travel, so the match of it with particularly affluent consumers is obvious from a financial standpoint. But “buying healthy” is also an emergent status symbol, and that, too, pairs with the affluent customer.

 Boomers’ Attitudes toward Retirement Classic retirement is no longer the goal or expectation of Boomers. A Gallup Poll in 2018 found that 74% of adults now plan to work past age 65. In contrast, back in 1998, it was 14%. Affluent Boomers who do not need to work or create earned income still expect to keep working. Ken Dychtwald, president of Age Wave, says, “They want the action. They don’t want to be on the sidelines.” My take on this is that they fear being irrelevant, being bored, and being looked on as old or out to pasture to such an extent that


-----

##### even secret yearnings to relax, do nothing, travel, and golf are trumped. This is demonstrated by countless celebrity Boomers and seniors. My friend, the late Joan Rivers, in her 80s, absent any economic need, worked furiously to—in her own words—stay relevant. I believe Cher is, as I’m writing this, about to release a new album and then embarking on another farewell tour. Senior entertainers find ways to step into the spotlight of younger stars. Bob Newhart was robbed of a deserved Emmy, but still captured the attention of the audience of CBS’ show, The Big Bang Theory, with his guest starring role as Professor Proton—made reoccurring by popular response. Senior crooner Tony Bennett, in 2014, released a duet CD with Lady Gaga and, in 2018, a new CD with Diana Krall. What do they all want? Relevance.
 From a marketing perspective, this suggests two points: First, if your products or services have anything to do with retirement, you’re going to need to redefine them. (Even boomer retirees do not like the term retiree.) Second, there’s opportunity in leveraging their desire to be active and relevant.

 Sales Strategies, Tactics, and Tools Basically, we can never know enough. Selling, in person or in media, is about connection. On a primitive level, it can be completely mechanized and some, sometimes satisfactory, money can be made. But on a sophisticated level, the more we understand, the more we are understood, accepted, and trusted.

 Language One way we translate our understanding of a group of people is by the language we use when speaking to them. Far too little effort is made by salespeople or copywriters to get the language right.
 Early-edge Boomers are quite sensitive about language used to describe them, their options, and their aging.
 In the 1950s, they used the term old folks’ home without negative thoughts about it; today if you suggested they move into one, they’d pop you one in the nose! Then came nursing homes. Then retirement homes. Now, assisted-living communities. But that industry is scrambling to again


-----

##### redefine and reposition itself to be acceptable to aging-resistant Boomers, especially affluent ones, who may very well need such housing and service options but are loath to admit it. This industry’s challenge can be seen as the positioning and linguistic challenge for all businesses seeking what dare not be called any longer a senior citizen market. (If anything, that kind of language has moved up on life’s calendar, to be used for and acceptable to people in their 80s and up.)

 Boomers and Nostalgia Everyone even barely conversant with NLP (neurolinguistic programming) understands the use of emotional ANCHORS in persuasion. An anchor may be a song or music, a visual image, a person, place, or thing already embedded in the prospect’s mind that when recalled and linked to you, your product, or your service produces positive thoughts and warm feelings and/or a sense of common bond, thus less resistance and greater, faster trust. Mainstream, mass advertisers most commonly attempt utilizing anchors by buying rights to and using very popular, well-remembered songs of Boomers’ youth. The best anchors, though, aren’t as simple, brief, or one- dimensional. For example, Roy Rogers is an anchor for (mostly male) Boomers of a certain age, but sitting on the floor in front of the TV, still in pajamas, with a bowl of cereal, to watch Roy Rogers, his superhorse, Trigger, and Dale Evans … that’s a better anchor.
 Age-appropriate NOSTALGIA ANCHORS are extremely useful in marketing to Boomers.
 The reasons nostalgia itself is so powerful are many, and they warrant an in-depth discussion of psychology, but to abbreviate: We naturally rewrite history and memory to romance the past (in linking to our desire for lost youth and immortality); we are dissatisfied with the present (because no reality can match imagined memory and because we are critical by nature); and we fear the future (as it links to mortality). Even false nostalgia is more appealing than present realities. As example, almost everybody likes—and buys things from—the little fake general store in Cracker Barrel® restaurants, even if the closest they ever actually got to a small-town general store with stuff in wood barrels was watching the Andy Griffith Show on TV. Celebration, a planned community in Orlando originally


-----

##### developed by Disney® (a MUST-tour), is built out of nostalgia anchors. It is the picture-perfect, quintessential American small town appealing to those with a romanticized memory of such a place, but almost as appealing to people with an imagined nostalgia for such a place.
 When marketing to Boomers, you will benefit greatly from carefully choosing and using age-appropriate, gender-appropriate, geography- appropriate nostalgia anchors. But you can’t overplay your hand either. Boomers are hypersensitive to being conned. They have seen a lot, have a lot of life experience, and quickly detect false, inauthentic, pandering attempts at connecting with them—and they resent them.
 As an interesting example, I’ve encouraged my investment partner Darin Garman to increase the small-town anchors in his marketing of American heartland investment properties to investors throughout the country, including many from the coasts. Why? Because one investor enunciated for us what others have not but must be influenced by: He, a New York resident attending his mother’s funeral in Iowa, saw Garman’s ad, called, and bought several hundred thousands of dollars of small-town Iowa real estate on impulse, based on nostalgia for his youth. We have since seen the power of telling the story of a place where small-town values still rule, where Fourth of July parades and Friday-night games are attended by the whole town, where churches host summer picnics and neighbors meet at the ice-cream stand—even though it has nothing whatsoever to do with a numbers decision for an investor. But this has to be done gently, naturally, authentically—not waved like a big red pennant. Fortunately for Garman, it is authentic. It’s where he lives and how he lives.

 What Sets Boomers’ Teeth on Edge: How to Lose a Boomer in 60
 Seconds If you want to know what will drive Boomers away from your business, here’s your answer. First and foremost, it is (perceived or real) disrespect. Boomers deeply resent and often react with rage to employees who 1) call them Pops, Ma’am, Old Man, and so on, either as deliberate or as an accidental offense; 2) dress in ways that Boomers view as inappropriate for the workplace and a sign of disrespect for the job and the customers; 3) talk down to them or are condescending, such as “I realize at your age you don’t


-----

##### know much about the internet, so …”; 4) use street slang or young slang or references instead of speaking the King’s English; 5) fail to clearly explain things; 6) hurry them (beyond their capability); 7) engage in impolite, disrespectful behavior, such as talking on a cell phone while ringing up their sale at a cash register.
 To do well with Boomers, every person in your employ or representing you who comes in contact with your customers must learn to do well with Boomers and modify his attitude, language, appearance, and behavior to do well with Boomers. Otherwise your people will sabotage your marketing.

 Big Opportunities and How Businesses Will Adapt to Boomers in
 Coming Years Conglomeration of Services As an example of the conglomeration-of-services approach, here’s my thought about the retirement community for affluent Boomers: I think there’ll be a boom in retirement lifestyle clubs that bundle together a primary-residence condo or apartment in something akin to today’s assisted-living center for timeshare exchanges for other such sites all over the country x number of weeks a year, plus cruise ship weeks, car and driver transportation at all home sites, concierge travel services, and concierge medical care, all for one monthly fee or lifetime prepayment.
 This may require insurance companies, doctors, hospitals, HMOs, real estate developers, and community operators to all come together in new joint ventures, or a big company from one of the involved industries—say, Marriott (already very active in assisted living and, obviously, in travel)—to be the organizer, or an entirely new type of corporation to be created. For the customer, this will offer the own-nothing, rent-everything option or the timeshare-your-whole-life-for-one-fee option. It is a quasi-marriage of today’s high-end destination travel clubs utilizing mansions as well as resort properties—with buy-ins in the $200,000.00 to $350,000.00 range plus yearly dues—with retirement communities and assisted-living facilities, with full services, from a driver waiting to take you to the mall to a doctor on call to a refrigerator stocked for you. The consumers may even pay by assigning assets via their wills or transferring assets through irrevocable trusts rather than with present-day dollars, as more and more Boomers feel


-----

##### entitled to spending it all rather than stacking it up for heirs. This requires new and very innovative thinking about product, business models, and financing models. (Charities have gotten very good at securing these post- death payments as well as getting large sums turned over in exchange for income or benefits for life. Why shouldn’t other businesses?)
 The truly innovative leaders—what I’m calling lifestyle service inventors—will make the huge new fortunes in America. Making fortunes from manufacturing is now freakish. Making fortunes from technology alone, on the ebb. Making fortunes in any single category of business being replaced by multichannel, multimedia, multi-category businesses based on high customer value is the coming trend.
 Using this as metaphor, you have to start thinking about just how radically your industry and connected or potentially connected industries may change or could be changed, and how you can be in the lead rather than chasing—or worse, watching.

 Experiences “Boomers aren’t likely to spend their retirement years sitting in a
 rocking chair. Instead, surveys suggest they’ll continue to SEEK OUT REMARKABLE EXPERIENCES—whether on cruise ships,
 in RVs, or at hotels and gambling tables.”

—FROM FORTUNE, 6/2006, A PRESCIENT FORECAST

##### Boomers are RESTLESS. They are easily bored and in need of a lot of external stimulation. The old idea of the 60s being a time to slow down and take it easy is moving forward, to people in their 70s and 80s, and is more common to NON-affluent Boomers and their elders solely because of financial limitations on their options. Today’s affluent Boomers want to be entertained wherever they go, whether to Las Vegas or to a neighborhood restaurant.
 Boomers are unsatisfied with the ordinary. An ordinary store, an ordinary mall, an ordinary hotel or resort, all unappealing. A resort needs to provide the chance to swim with dolphins, not just a nice pool area. Vegas and Disney® set the bar for themed experiences and environments, and retailers and other businesses must follow suit. Even mail-order catalogs


-----

##### and websites need to provide multidimensional experiences, not just a descriptions of goods. You may immediately be tempted to engage in the Uncreative “But my business is different” thinking as an excuse for not creating exciting and memorable experiences for prospects and customers, clients, or patients—but Boomers will not reward you.

 Service Spread Thin: A Crisis and Opportunity in Capitalizing on the
 Affluent Boomer Boom Boomers are far more demanding regarding service than, progressively, members of each younger generation. A 30-year-old is not annoyed by—and may even prefer—self-serve grocery checkouts, or self- serve online banking; a 60-year-old hates it. Affluent Boomers will go out of their way to go where they get exceptional service.
 However, the United States is experiencing a significant and growing shortage of service-sector employees. By 2030, America will have twice as many retirees as in 2005, but only 15% more service workers to support them—and that’s with unchecked illegal immigration. The demand for service is outpacing the workforce required to provide it, now and into the future. Most businesses are reacting to minimum-wage increases, overall increases in costs per employee, and ever-increasing managerial frustrations with quality of employees by reducing the number of service employees per x amount of gross sales or by some other ratio; substituting automation; and substituting self-serve systems, transferring the burden to the customer. This may be mathematically sensible, but letting bean counters create policy is a consistently destructive act. (Bean counters should count beans. Period. Kennedy’s First Law of Investing: Never invest in a company run by the accountants.)
 For success with the boomer boom, and especially with affluent Boomers, a business needs to alter its fundamental economics in order to do the polar opposite: increase the number of service persons … pay above- average wages and offer incentives to attract and keep superior people … invest in continual training (including training on satisfying boomer customers) … and integrate exceptional service promises into its advertising and marketing.


-----

##### My favorite business success tactic is to engineer a business to be able to substantially outspend all its competitors on advertising and marketing, customer acquisition, and customer retention. I would extend this to hiring, training, and motivating people.

 Social Networks and Organizations That Attract Boomers AARP (www.aarp.org) is one of the largest membership organizations in the United States. It began as—and, to a great extent, is still a mask for —a business selling insurance, financial services, and other services to seniors, and selling ad media and other access to its members to companies marketing to seniors. In short, it is a marketing and media business presenting itself to a group of customers as an association working for them, serving them, even representing them politically. It is a terrific example of a tollbooth business. And of an illusion.
 AARP’s media is expensive but pretty much essential if you are going to be a serious national marketer to the 55-plus boomer and senior markets. Many companies err by not integrating to the greatest extent possible with AARP, via advertising in its media, exhibiting at its conventions, providing editorial content for its publications, renting its lists, and offering discounts and benefits to its members. AARP is the big kahuna in this market, with nothing but growth in size and influence ahead.
 AARP is also evidence of a “joiner bias” among Boomers. Boomers are membership oriented, having grown up with many more affinity groups of influence than have younger generations. This is an exploitable bias. There is ample room for niched organizations serving Boomers or only affluent Boomers, largely copying AARP—for example, an association for affluent boomer travelers or affluent boomer real estate investors or affluent boomer golfers.
 The ELKS (www.elks.org) organization has, by comparison, only one million members and is struggling. Very recently, a sign of new life: the average member age has come down from 69 to 61, and for the first time in 35 years, membership is growing. The organization does have 2,100 lodges throughout the United States. It has potential for reinvigoration or reinvention. Unfortunately for the Elks, they do not skew affluent and tend not to attract affluent Boomers … essentially they are trying to pump life


-----