#### the “niche information marketing business.” Bill immediately began selling his “system” to other clothing store owners, then sporting goods retailers, then jewelers, then furniture store owners, and ultimately more than 10,000 independent retailers of every imaginable stripe, fueling a multi-million- dollar publishing business.
 The plan he followed is one I’ve explained, shown, and taught, one way or another, to thousands of owners of all sorts of businesses. Quite a few others have used it to create great second businesses in information marketing—so many, in fact, there’s an association of them, the Information Marketing Association, accessible at www.info-marketing.org . But ... big, big but: For every one who has acted on this opportunity presented to them as Bill did, there are hundreds, if not thousands, who could have but didn’t. They never got anywhere because they never got going and they never got going because they never got started.
 Bill became such a master of this business that, about five years ago, I sold him mine, it became Glazer-Kennedy Insider’s Circle[™], and he now leads this multi-faceted publishing company serving a membership of more than 25,000 entrepreneurs worldwide. Bill has also achieved wide acclaim as an advertising guru, represented by his bestselling book, Outrageous Advertising That’s Outrageously Successful.
 All because he acted on an idea. Do not err in focusing on the fact that none of the above examples have anything to do with the specific, particular business you are in. Consider only the behavioral commonality demonstrated in all of them. And take note of the side effect experienced by all of them .
 I’ll come at this two more ways. Mike Vance, a close associate of Walt Disney’s for many years, consultant to top companies, and author of the book Think Outside the Box, tells the story of asking a troubled corporate CEO what his biggest, most vexing problem was. After he described it, Mike asked “Who’s working on it?” The CEO said “No one.” When Mike asked why, the CEO said, “Because it can’t be solved.” Against that, consider advice from General Norman Schwarzkopf. For three years, I followed General Schwarzkopf on seminar events, heard his speech so many times I memorized it without trying, and spent a lot of time in green rooms talking with him. One of the things that sticks in my mind is his contention that a bad decision or wrong decision is better than no decision, because if the decision leads to action, it is easier to correct the course of

-----

#### someone or something already in motion than it is to get someone or something into motion from inertia. In his groundbreaking work “Psycho- Cybernetics,” Dr. Maxwell Maltz presents “zig zagging” and “course correction” as the entire basis for human achievement; that hardly anybody gets to any goal via a straight line, but, instead, by moving, bumping up against something, moving a different way, bumping, zigging, zagging, but moving, moving, moving.
 Finally, let me reveal one of my own, personal “secrets of success.” It is a daily discipline I have adhered to for more than 30 years. I’d wager I’ve neglected it less than 30 days out of the 30 years, adhered to it 10,920 out of 10,950 days. Every day, no matter what else I am doing or must do that day, even if in a full day of consulting or traveling across country or on vacation, I still do one thing—if only one thing—intended to “prime my pump,” to create future business for myself or my companies. It may be a small thing; tearing out a magazine article that should interest one of my clients, scrawling a note on it, and mailing it. It may be answering one item of correspondence. Getting one fax sent. Identifying a new, potentially useful contact, jotting a note, sending a book. But no day passes without me doing at least one such thing. Although it is no longer required, it has been especially important to me over the years because a lot of my income is derived from delivery of services, such as speaking, consulting, coaching, advertising copywriting, so, in a way, I must sell “it” and make “it.” Most professionals stop selling while they’re delivering, so they have dry spells, roller coaster ups and downs. I have had more demand than supply of me, and waiting lists of clients for many years because of my daily discipline of doing at least one proactive thing to attract business every single day.