Second confession: I have made and continue to make a great deal of money as a result of marketing technology and all things online that I personally detest, and I lack the moral character to turn my back on any of these mercenary opportunities. I know a great deal more about online marketing than people familiar with my personal preferences often assume. I direct others in the use of online marketing for me, and every day I work with clients in diverse product and service categories aggressively using online media, I write a lot of marketing copy for online media, and I guide most clients into more and better use of much of the online media. I do not need to personally ever even look at any of it in order to make use of it for profit any more than I need to enter a kitchen and cook in order to eat a gourmet dinner. Nor do you. So if you happen to share my revulsion for much of it or share my Luddite status or feel aggrieved, abused, intimidated, inept, or at least uncomfortable with it, don’t let that stop you from letting it be used to make a profit for you.

 Let’s be very clear about everything online, from a marketing standpoint. We are talking about marketing media, which is nothing

-----

##### less, more, or markedly different than any and every other form of marketing media. The idea that online marketing is significantly different is utter nonsense. A hammer and a drill are different to the same very limited extent that online media is different from offline media, but they are all tools that must perform virtually the same productive purpose—i.e., a construction task or a sales task—and they are wielded in much the same way. A hammer has a head, and a drill has a pointed bit. An e-mail has a subject line, and a printed sales letter has a headline—after that difference, both are identical, both share the same purposes and functions, and both are governed by exactly the same rules (outlined in this book’s companion book, The Ultimate Sales Letter). If you ascribe vast differences to online versus offline media, you severely handicap yourself. Don’t gift any of this with more magical or mysterious properties than it really has. A stone is a stone, even if painted different colors, attached to a wire and plugged into the wall, polished to a bright shine and imaginatively merchandised as a diamond you are required to buy, or attached to a leash and put in a box with an owners’ manual and sold as a pet.

 Now, I’ll give you my comments about the chief forms of online media, opportunities for good use of each, and cautions about each. The speed and constancy of change online and with online media make it problematic to publish a book such as this and its lifespan without correction or change. Writing about specifics with regard to Internet marketing in a traditionally published book is a fool’s endeavor. As a result, my advice is broad and general, based on reliable marketing principles and in keeping with the entirety of The Ultimate Marketing Plan.

 Websites

 You pretty much gotta have one or more, even if your utilization of it is limited to verifying your existence and (amusingly) your legitimacy. Too many consumers responding to other forms of advertising and solicitation check the advertiser’s website before taking any next steps for you to be absent. Beyond that, there are many very good reasons to have and use and possibly invest effort and/or money in driving traffic to websites. You may have reason for a brochure-type site that tells your entire business story, gives visitors a lot of freedom to roam, and is not all or predominately about directly making a sale; a site that is an online catalog; a site that is a single sales letter with a single, focused outcome; a lead-capture site that functions as kin to an 800-number and automated capture by robot voice of the interested person’s contact information (and does nothing more); and a variety of customer service sites in addition to marketing sites. Customer service sites might include membership sites and informational/educational sites for specific products or services. Most business should have more than one website.

 The best things about websites are the fact that an unlimited amount of real estate is fundamentally free and they can be made navigable,

-----

##### with their own search functions.

 My favorite marketing use of websites for clients is integrated with offline media, with the offline in front of or behind the site, or both.

 For example, I have a client very profitably mailing postcards to prospects on rented mailing lists of buyers of analogous products; the postcards drive the responders to a website where their contact information is captured and they can view a brief, introductory video. Those prospects are then mailed elaborate sales packages with long sales letters to sell the pricey product. In this case, the website is sandwiched in the middle of offline media and used very simply for automated contact information capture. Another client, with a chain of specialty stores, again uses direct mail, print, Valpak, as well as online search engine optimization and paid banner ads to drive people to a website offering choices of five video presentations about five different products plus a rolling-deadline coupon for the product presented in the chosen video and an automated six-step follow-up e-mail sequence.

 One caution: Several different tests I personally conducted or was intimately privy to, as I was completing this book, tested offline advertisements and direct mail offering a website as the only means of response versus offering choices of a website and phone number to call. In every such test, reaching age targets as low as thirty-five, the website- only offer was far, far, far outperformed by the web and phone offer. In one instance, targeting affluent consumers over the age of fifty, the web- plus-phone pulled 300 percent more responses than the web only, and the 200 percent bump coming from offering phone proved to be of superior quality as well—measured by the prospects’ stated income and net worth and by their purchases.

 I take no joy from these results, despite my confessed, personal anathema toward the Internet. As a marketer, I would rather be able to offer website-only marketing and eliminate hordes of inbound telemarketers and their wages, commissions, health benefits, and managerial costs and replace them with the entirely automated technology. Also, I can do more with a lead captured online than a lead responding by phone, providing less information. So I take no joy in the fact that, in 90 percent of situations, it is a huge financial mistake to make visiting a website the only way an interested consumer can respond to your marketing—or, for that matter, the only way established customers can interact with you beyond their first transaction. And if you are young and of the mind that everybody cheerfully uses the Internet, polling data as recent as late 2010 revealed that 21 percent of the American public has yet to even once access or use the Internet. Assume they are all toothless, shoeless, clueless, impoverished seniors living in trailers in rural Arkansas at your extreme peril.

 By this caution, I do not mean to discourage use of marketing websites. I only want to emphasize they should not be replacements (yet) for other media or for other means of consumer response.

-----

##### At Glazer-Kennedy Insider’s Circle™, you’ll find extensive use of all kinds of online media, but specific to websites there are three primary ones: NoBSBooks.com is a presentation site (only) about all my books and a place readers can access extra resources related to the books. DanKennedy.com is the main, multipurpose institutional site presenting the company as a whole, offering newsletter subscriptions and trial subscriptions, as well as providing different access to different resources for Members at different levels. Third, DanKennedy.com/store takes visitors directly to the online catalog. There are also hundreds of FreeGiftFrom<Insert-Name>.com sites and variations thereof, presenting different free information, free “teaser” product, and free trial membership offers directly and through affiliates. These are single- purpose, focused sites, essentially video-supported sales letters that make direct offers. You can see an example by accepting the free invitation at the back of this book. In addition to all this, there is also http://nobstv.dankennedy.com, where an online TV show featuring interviews with business and marketing experts airs. I suggest visiting all these sites to see what we’re up to.

 As I was writing this, the most frequently used, successful, and important strategy at many sites intended to capture contact information from new prospective customers is the double- or triple-squeeze page, so named because its purpose is to squeeze as much information as possible out of the visitor, to enable as much follow-up as possible. The first squeeze page has the lowest threshold, asking only for a name and e-mail address in exchange for access past a locked door, viewing of a video, attending a webinar, or getting free information delivered electronically. The second squeeze page, appearing after the first is successfully navigated, offers some gift or product or other physical thing sent by mail, UPS, or Federal Express, thus requiring the person’s full physical address and phone number. The third, appearing after the second is successfully completed, may be a survey or questionnaire collecting information enabling the marketer to segment these prospects in some way—by interest, income, age, type of business, etc.—to facilitate customized product offerings and follow-up. The most successful marketers go to considerable extent to build lists of prospects for follow-up marketing and then to do complex, multistep, multimedia follow-up marketing. With many of my clients, we are creating first- transaction income from website visitors captured as long as two years ago.

 Online Marketing Platforms

 Two big, universal moneymaking principles: In discussions of wealth, such as those in my book No B.S. Wealth Attraction in the New Economy, I make the point that money is always in motion, and it’s beneficial to be where it is moving toward, preferably positioned right in its path. Second principle: OPC, which stands for Other Peoples’ Customers, is capital just like OPM, Other Peoples’ Money. If you combine them, you want to be where someone else has already collected

-----

##### the customers you want and then engineer a way to step into the traffic of those customers as they move about and spend their money at that other person’s place. In many respects, OPC is even better than OPM, as it starts you further along toward your objectives. If you amass or borrow capital, you must then invest it—and put it at risk—in finding, attracting, and purchasing customers. It’s faster and surer to skip all that and start with customers.

 Using Video

 YouTube is not just a giant bazaar of TV clips and funny videos —it is the second-largest search engine, trailing only Google. YouTube offers an opportunity for you to promote your business, and all you need—technically—is an inexpensive flip-video camera or Kodak Zi8 pocket camcorder. You can produce your own videos and upload to YouTube. —from Rick Gee, www.MarketingProfitStrategiesblog.com

 An additional resource to check out regarding video is www.TheVideoMarketingGuru.com.

 A marketing platform is a place where customers already gather and also a place or media that allows you to promote yourself and your wares to those customers. Offline, a good example would be the artist who secures a spot on a cruise ship during a ten-day cruise, where he gets to have a reception, showing, and art auction one evening; promote it over the ship’s loudspeaker system every morning leading up to it; have invitations distributed to all the staterooms; and after the event have a gallery location. The ship is his marketing platform. And in the offline, physical world you should look for and take advantage of as many appropriate platforms as you can.

 Online, just about anybody’s website visited or patronized by the same customers you seek could be a marketing platform for you, but there are a number of big, commercial platforms with formal ways of using them—notably eBay, Amazon, and Google, Google AdWords, and Google Shopping. Most people know about eBay, but not as many people are familiar with the opportunities to open their own online store at Amazon or the opportunities to use Google Shopping. Very recently, the owner of a very small specialty store in my neighborhood told me he’d been getting five or six sales a week from his website for over a year and thought of it as a nice little bonus over and above his local business, but immediately after connecting to Google Shopping, he began averaging over fifty online sales a week. A client of mine in the nutrition business is taking in over $20,000.00 a month from her store on Amazon’s platform. She also cleverly wrote and self-published several health books that she sells at nominal prices via Amazon, with

-----

##### the books all ending with sales letters for her bee pollen–based supplements.

 Google in totality is the biggest platform, but with its size comes bureaucracy, arbitrariness, and outright stupidity that frustrates and frightens many marketers. I have a client making well over $100,000.00 a month entirely from new customers generated from Google, including SEO activity (search engine optimization), spending on Google AdWords, and using Google Shopping—but rather than basking in the glow of his prosperity, he is racing to liberate himself from dependency on Google because, as he puts it, he has trouble sleeping at night knowing his entire destiny is in the hands of a corporate monster. He is well-served by his paranoia and active pursuit of diversity, but the power of Google AdWords and SEO on Google can’t be ignored. The two leading authorities helping marketers use and maximize results from Google AdWords happen to be Glazer-Kennedy Insider’s Circle™ Members, and they are happy to be of help to readers of this book. If you are already investing $5,000.00 or more on Google AdWords or are capable of such investment, I urge contacting Timothy Seward at www.ROIRevolution.com and arranging for a free AdWords Optimizer Strategy Consulting Call. If you are a smaller player, in need of solid do- it-yourself strategies for Google, I urge contacting my friend Perry Marshall, author of the book Definitive Guide to Google AdWords, at www.perrymarshall.com.

 For every one of these major platforms, there are how-to books available, written by people who began using them for their businesses, grew big incomes with them, and made themselves into experts on their use. A simple visit to a bookstore or an online bookseller will get you to them. Most of these entities also have online tutorials and other assistance for new merchant-users as well.

 This is an ideal way for a local business to expand its reach with little outlay of cash or risk, and it may lead you to an even bigger opportunity than your present business.

 Another kind of platform that sprung to life right around the same time I was writing this book is the “deal of the day” media, where somebody has assembled a large opt-in list of consumers, by local area or by special interest, who welcome a daily or weekly e-mail offering of a great deal, bargain, or discount from a local or specialty merchant. The lion in this jungle when I wrote this was Groupon.com, but many others were racing to adapt or improve on its model. Among them are LivingSocial and, by the direct-mail coupon mailer Valpak, Valpak Deals. Groupon members are not just directed to the merchant offering the deal; they buy the discount vouchers upfront, from Groupon, guaranteeing a high rate of redemption. Groupon was in fourteen local markets at inception and, in one year’s time, was operating in over 300 local markets spanning thirty-one countries. A number of Glazer- Kennedy Insider’s Circle™ Members and a couple of clients have

-----

##### reported success, to varying degrees, marketing their business via Groupon. The price of acquiring customers via a third-party coupon seller like Groupon is high. Not only is the merchant giving a discount of 60 to 70 percent or equivalent exceptional value, they are sharing revenue with the coupon seller like Groupon and they do not have access to the database of the coupon buyers—only those who redeem them. Still, in many cases, the true, total cost of acquiring new customers directly is as high or higher, and the speed of acquisition slower.

 In the specialty interest category, I have a client, KidsBowlFree.com, which markets for bowling centers to over 1 million families online, but is expanding with paid marketing for other kid- or family-oriented businesses to that same opt-in list of families. These online marketing entities are in the same position traditional mail-order catalog companies are in that they have active, responsive lists of people looking to them to bring forward relevant, interesting, value-priced products, services, and offers—so they need new products, services, and offers or they risk losing the valuable relationship they have with their list. These online entities, almost without exception, make their money from fees and/or revenue sharing with merchants, not from the consumers on their lists, so they also need merchants with hot products or offers that a large number of the people on their lists will buy. (See advice in Chapter 2 concerning irresistible offers.)

 I encourage active, aggressive, continuous exploration of all these platform opportunities. Good access to already assembled and qualified potential customers or, better yet, already assembled, actual customers with a proven willingness to spend money on products and services closely analogous to yours is one of the single most beneficial strategies you’ll ever use.

 Social Media